### Chapter 6 Bilinearity

We give an introduction to a general theory of “multiplication” of vectors.

#### 6.1 Bilinear maps

##### 6.1.1 Definitions and examples

###### Definition

. Let $U,V,W$ be vector spaces over a field $\F$. A map $B:U\times V\to W$ is _bilinear_ if it is linear in each slot separately:

$\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

$$ \begin{align*} B(\lambda u_1+u_2,v)&=\lambda B(u_1,v)+B(u_2,v)\\ B(u,\lambda v_1+v_2)&=\lambda B(u,v_1)+B(u,v_2), \end{align*} $$ for all $u,u_1,u_2\in U$, $v,v_1,v_2\in V$ and $\lambda \in \F$.

A bilinear map $U\times V\to \F$ is called a _bilinear pairing_.

A bilinear map $V\times V\to \F$ is called a _bilinear form on $V$_.

- Remark. A bilinear map $B:U\times V\to W$ has $B(u,0)=B(0,v)=0$, for all $u\in U$ and $v\in V$. Indeed,

  $\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

  $$ B(u,0)=B(u,0+0)=B(u,0)+B(u,0) $$

  and similarly for $B(0,v)$.

###### Examples

.

###### Notation

. We let $\bil (U,V;W)$ denote the set of bilinear maps $U\times V\to W$.

- Exercise. Show that $\bil (U,V;W)\leq W^{U\times V}$. Otherwise said, $\bil (U,V;W)$ is a vector space under pointwise addition and scalar multiplication.

For the rest of the chapter we focus on the simplest case: bilinear forms $B:V\times V\to \F$.

##### 6.1.2 Bilinear forms and matrices

###### Definition

. Let $V$ be a vector space over $\F$ with basis $\cB =\lst {v}1n$ and let $B:V\times V\to \F$ be a bilinear form. The _matrix of $B$ with respect to $\cB$_ is $A\in M_{n\times n}(\F )$ given by

$\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

$$ A\_{ij}=B(v_i,v_j), $$

for $\bw 1{i,j}n$.

The matrix $A$ along with $\cB$ tells the whole story:

- [[Proposition 6.1]]. Let $B:V\times V\to \F$ be a bilinear form with matrix $A$ with respect to $\cB =\lst {v}1n$. Then $B$ is completely determined by $A$: if $v=\sum _{i=1}^nx_iv_i$ and $w=\sum _{j=1}^ny_jv_j$ then

  $\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

  $$ B(v,w)=\sum _{i,j=1}^nx_iy_jA_{ij}, $$

  or, equivalently, for all $x,y\in \F ^n$,

  $\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

  $$ B(\phi _{\cB }(x),\phi _{\cB }(y))=B_A(x,y)=\bx ^TA\by . $$

- Proof. We simply expand out using the bilinearity of $B$:

  $\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

  $$ B(v,w)=\sum _{i,j=1}^nx_iy_jB(v_i,v_j)=\sum _{i,j=1}^nx*iy_jA*{ij}. $$

  □

- Remarks.
- - 1. When $V=\F ^n$ and $\cB$ is the standard basis (so that $\phi _{\cB }=\id _{\F ^n}$), this tells us that any bilinear form on $V$ is $B_{A}$ for some matrix $A\in M_{n\times n}(\F )$.
  - 2. There is a similar analysis for any bilinear map $B:U\times V\to W$. In this case, $B$ is determined by $B(u_i,v_j)\in W$ for $\lst {u}1m$ a basis of $U$ and $\lst {v}1n$ a basis of $V$.

How does $A$ change when we change basis of $V$?

- [[Proposition 6.2]]. Let $B:V\times V\to \F$ be a bilinear form with matrices $A$ and $A'$ with respect to bases $\cB$ and $\cB '$ of $V$. Then

  $\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

  $$ A'=P^TAP $$

  where $P$ is the change of basis matrix1 from $\cB$ to $\cB '$: thus $\phi _P=\phi _{\cB }^{-1}\circ \phi _{\cB '}$.

- Proof. Since $\phi _{\cB '}=\phi _{\cB }\circ \phi _{P}$, we have

  $\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

  \begin{multline*} \bx ^TA'\by =B(\phi *{\cB '}(x),\phi *{\cB '}(y))=B(\phi *{\cB }(\phi \_P(x)),\phi *{\cB }(\phi \_P(y)))\\ =B_A(\phi \_P(x),\phi \_P(y))=(P\bx )^TA(P\by )=\bx ^T(P^TAP)\by , \end{multline*} for all $x,y\in \F ^n$. Taking $x=e_i$ and $y=e_j$, this gives $A'_{ij}=(P^TAP)_{ij}$ so that $A'=P^TAP$. □

This prompts:

###### Definition

. We say that matrices $A,B\in M_{n\times n}(\F )$ are _congruent_ if there is $P\in \GL (n,\F )$ such that

$\seteqnumber{0}{6.}{0}$

$$ B=P^TAP. $$

- Remark. The congruence relation should remind us of orthogonal diagonalisation but here there is no demand that $P^{-1}=P^T$.

1 See Definition 1 in Section 2.6 of Algebra 1B.
