# Specifying probabilities

> #programming-note do we want to refactor this into extending probabilities from $\omega_i$ to $E \in \calF$? Maybe separate into two?

As we noted in this course we shall be concerned with sample spaces that are countable so that they are either finite, $\Omega=\set{(\omega)_1, \dots, (\omega)_n}$, or countably infinite, $\Omega=\set{ (\omega)_1, (\omega)_2, \dots}$.

In this case we can give a general method for specifying a probability measure $\P$ on $(\Omega, \calF)$ which satisfies Kolmogorov's axioms.

## Theorem

Let $\Omega=\set{(\omega)_1, \dots ⁡, (\omega)_n}$ be a Finite Set and $\calF$ any event space of subsets of $\Omega$.

Let $\lst p1n$ be non negative numbers that sum to one. 

If we define $\P(\omega) = (\set{\omega_i})$ to be given the graph $\lst p1n \times \Omega$ then by [[1.4 Kolmogorov's Axioms of Probability#^ka3]], with each $\set{\omega_i}$ being disjoint, this gives us: For any event $E \in \calF$ define $\P(E)$ by

$$
\P(E) = \sum_{i \st \omega_i \in E} p_i
$$

where the sum over an empty set is defined to be zero. 

### Proof

We will prove the case for $\Omega$ finite by verifying that all of [[1.4 Kolmogorov's Axioms of Probability]] hold. 

As each $p_i$ is non-negative then any combination of their sum must be also, and hence [[1.4 Kolmogorov's Axioms of Probability#^ka1|(A1)]] holds. 

As per their construction $\sum p_i = 1$ and hence $\P(\Omega) = \sum_{\Forall \omega_i} p_i = 1$ and [[1.4 Kolmogorov's Axioms of Probability#^ka2|(A2)]] holds.

For [[1.4 Kolmogorov's Axioms of Probability#^ka1|(A3)]], as $\Omega$ is finite then we only need to consider finite unions. Let $\lst E1k$ be pairwise disjoint events ($E_i \cap E_j = \emptyset, i \ne j$).

Thus $\omega \in E_i \implies \omega \notin E_j, j \ne i$ which leads to,

$$
\begin{align}
\P\(\bigcup_{i = 1}^k E_i\)
&= \sum_{j \st \omega_j \in \(\bigcup_{i = 1}^k E_i\)} p_i \\
&= \sum_{i = 0}^k \(
	\sum_{j \st \omega_j \in E_i} p_i
\)
\tag{As $\omega_j$ is in 1 $E_i$}
\\
&= \sum_{i = 0}^k \P(E_i)
\tag{By defn of $\P$}
\end{align}
$$

and thus [[1.4 Kolmogorov's Axioms of Probability#^ka1|(A3)]] holds.

Notice that here we have not specified the *values* of the $p_i$'s, merely given a conceptual framework with which to work with them. The values themselves will be discussed later.
