[[next](MA10210se9.html)] [[prev](MA10210se7.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se7.html#tailMA10210se7.html)] [[tail](#tailMA10210se8.html)] [[up](MA10210ch2.html#MA10210se8.html)]

### 2.3 [Kernels and images](MA10210.html#QQ2-12-20)

Definition 1.  
Let $\phi:V\rightarrow W$ be a linear map.

(1)

The kernel

$$
Ker \phi = \left\{ v \in V : \phi \left( v \right) = 0 \right\} .
$$

(2)

The image 
$$
\begin{align}
 \Im \phi & = & \left\{ w \in W : w = \phi \left( v \right) \text{ for some }v\in V\text{} \right\} & \text{} \\ & = & \left\{ \phi \left( v \right) : v \in V \right\}. & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

Proposition 2.  
Let $\phi:V\rightarrow W$ be a linear map.

(a)

$Ker\phi$ is a linear subspace of $V$ .

(b)

$ \Im \phi$ is a linear subspace of $W$ .

Proof.

(a)

$\phi\left( 0 \right)=0\Rightarrow 0\in Ker\phi$ .

If $v,w\in Ker\phi,\lambda,\mu\in𝔽$ ,

$$
\begin{align}
\phi\left( \lambda v + \mu w \right) & = & \lambda\phi\left( v \right)+\mu\phi\left( w \right) & \text{} \\ & = & \lambda 0+\mu 0=0 & \text{} \\ \Rightarrow\lambda v+\mu w & \in & Ker\phi & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

(b)

$\phi\left( 0 \right)=0\Rightarrow 0\in \Im \phi$ .

For any $\phi\left( v \right),\phi\left( w \right)\in \Im \phi$ , we have

$$
\lambda \phi \left( v \right) + \mu \phi \left( w \right) = \phi \left( \lambda v + \mu w \right) \in  \Im  \phi .
$$

Thus $ \Im \phi$ is a subspace. □

Example 3.  

(1)

For $\left(\phi\right)_{A}:\left(𝔽\right)^{n}\rightarrow\left(𝔽\right)^{m}:x\rightarrow tailAx.$

$Ker\left(\phi\right)_{A}$ is the null space $N_{A}$ .

$ \Im \left(\phi\right)_{A}$ is the ‘column space’ of $A$

$$
= \left\{\sum_{i = 1}^{n} \left(\lambda\right)_{i} \left(col\right)_{i} \left( A \right) : \left(\lambda\right)_{i} \in 𝔽\right\} .
$$

(2)

$$
\phi = \frac{d^{k}}{d X^{k}} : ℝ \left[ X \right] \rightarrow ℝ \left[ X \right]
$$

is a composition of linear maps, hence linear. Its kernel is

$$
Ker \phi = \left\{ \text{polynomials of degree  }\leq k-1\text{} \right\}
$$

and its image is

$$
 \Im  \left(\phi\right)_{A} = ℝ \left[ x \right] , \text{ as integrating plynomials gives polynomials.}
$$

Proposition 4.  
A linear map $\phi:V\rightarrow W$ is injective iff $Ker\phi=\left\{ 0 \right\}$.

Proof. For $\Rightarrow$ : Suppose $x\in Ker\phi$ , i.e.  $\phi\left( x \right)=0$ .

Now we know $\phi\left( 0 \right)=0$ , so if $\phi$ is injective, then

$$
\phi \left( x \right) = \phi \left( 0 \right) \Rightarrow x = 0 .
$$

Therefore $Ker\phi=\left\{ 0 \right\}$.

For $\Leftarrow=$ : Suppose $\phi\left( x \right)=\phi\left( y \right)$ .

Since $\phi$ is linear,

$$
\phi \left( x - y \right) = \phi \left( x \right) - \phi \left( y \right) = 0 .
$$

Hence $x-y\in Ker\phi$ . As $Ker\phi=\left\{ 0 \right\}$, this means $x-y=0$ , i.e.  $x=y$ .

Thus $\phi$ is injective. □

Note.  

*   A linear map $\phi:V\rightarrow W$ is surjective if and only if $ \Im \phi=W$ . So $\phi$ is bijective if and only if $Ker\phi=\left\{ 0 \right\}$ and $ \Im \phi=W$ .
*   For a linear map $\phi:V\rightarrow W$ , we can define the fibre of $\phi$ at $w\in W$ by
    
    $$
    \left(\phi\right)^{- 1} \left( w \right) = \left\{ v \in V : \phi \left( v \right) = w \right\} ,
    $$
    
    So in terms of fibres,
    
    (i) $Ker\phi$ is the firber of the map $\phi$ at $0$ .
    
    (ii) the solution space of the linear system $Ax=b$ is the fibre $\phi_{A}^{- 1}\left( b \right)$ .
    

[[next](MA10210se9.html)] [[prev](MA10210se7.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se7.html#tailMA10210se7.html)] [[front](MA10210se8.html)] [[up](MA10210ch2.html#MA10210se8.html)]