[[next](MA10210se14.html)] [[prev](MA10210se12.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se12.html#tailMA10210se12.html)] [[tail](#tailMA10210se13.html)] [[up](MA10210ch3.html#MA10210se13.html)]

### 3.2 [Building bases of finite-dimensional vector spaces](MA10210.html#QQ2-18-29)

Start with some elementary properties of independence/spanning/bases.

Lemma 1.  
The following are some easy facts.

(a)

Reordering a list $\alpha:v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ does not change it being independent/spanning/a basis.

(b)

Any sub-list of an independent list is independent.

(c)

Any list containing a spanning list is spanning.

(d)

If $\theta:V\rightarrow W$ isomorphism, then the list $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ is independent/spanning/a basis, iff the list $\theta\left( v_{1} \right),\dots ,\theta\left( v_{n} \right)$ is independent/spanning/a basis.

Proof. Exercise. □

Note.  
Lemma [3.2.1](#x18-29001r1) (a) means that we can talk about a set being independent/spanning/basis, as these properties are independent of ordering.

Proposition 2.  

(a)

If $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ is a spanning list of $V$ and $v_{n}\in\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{n - 1} \rangle$, then $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n - 1}$ is also a spanning list of $V$ .

(b)

If $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n - 1}$ is a linearly independent list and $v_{n}\notin\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{n - 1} \rangle$, then $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ is also a linearly independent list.

Proof.

(a)

If

$$
w = \left(\lambda\right)_{1} v_{1} + \dots  + \left(\lambda\right)_{n} v_{n}
$$

and

$$
v_{n} = \left(\mu\right)_{1} v_{1} + \dots  + \left(\mu\right)_{n - 1} v_{n - 1} ,
$$

then

$$
w = \left( \left(\lambda\right)_{1} + \left(\lambda\right)_{n} \left(\mu\right)_{1} \right) v_{1} + \dots  + \left( \left(\lambda\right)_{n - 1} + \left(\lambda\right)_{n} \left(\mu\right)_{n - 1} \right) v_{n - 1} \in \langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{n - 1} \rangle .
$$

So any vector $w\in V$ is a linear combination of $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n - 1}$ , i.e. the list $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n - 1}$ spans $V$ , as required.

(b)

Suppose we had a linear dependence

$$
\left(\lambda\right)_{1}v_{1}+\dots +\left(\lambda\right)_{n}v_{n}=0.
$$

(1)

If $\left(\lambda\right)_{n}\neq 0$ , then

$$
v_{n}=-\frac{1}{\left(\lambda\right)_{n}}\left( \left(\lambda\right)_{1} v_{1} + \dots  + \left(\lambda\right)_{n - 1} v_{n - 1} \right)\in\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{n - 1} \rangle,
$$

contradicting that $v_{n}\notin\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{n - 1} \rangle$. So we must have $\left(\lambda\right)_{n}=0$ and thus the equation (1) becomes

$$
\left(\lambda\right)_{1} v_{1} + \dots  + \left(\lambda\right)_{n - 1} v_{n - 1} = 0 .
$$

As $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n - 1}$ independent, all other $\left(\lambda\right)_{i}=0$ and so the list $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ is independent. □

Terminology: A set/list $X$ is maximal/minimal with some property, if there is no set $Y$ with the same property and

$$
\left( X \subseteq Y , X \neq Y \right) / \left( Y \subseteq X , X \neq Y \right) .
$$

Example 3.  
Amongst subsets of $\left\{ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 \right\}$ with the property of ‘constant parity’ (i.e. elements in a subset are either all odd or all even), $\left\{ 1 , 3 , 5 \right\}$ and $\left\{ 2 , 4 \right\}$ are both maximal.

Proposition 4.  
Let $\alpha:v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ be a list of vectors in $V$ . The following are equivalent.

(a)

$\alpha$ is a basis.

(b)

$\alpha$ is a minimal spanning list.

(c)

$\alpha$ is a maximal independent list.

Proof. (1) We first show that (b) is equivalent to (a):

(b) $\Rightarrow$ (a)

Suppose $\alpha$ is a minimal spanning list of $V$ . Assume (for contradiction) that $\alpha$ is not a basis. Then it cannot be independent, i.e. there is a dependence

$$
\sum_{i = 0}^{n} \left(\lambda\right)_{i} v_{i} = 0
$$

with some $\left(\lambda\right)_{j}\neq 0$ . So

$$
v_{j} = - \frac{1}{\left(\lambda\right)_{j}} \underset{i \neq j}{\sum} \left(\lambda\right)_{i} v_{i}
$$

Thus we can omit $v_{j}$ to get a shorter list, which still spans by Proposition [3.2.2](#x18-29006r2) (a), contradicting the minimality of $\alpha$ . Therefore, $\alpha$ must be a basis.

(a) $\Rightarrow$ (b)

If a proper sublist $\left(\alpha\right)^{′}$ of $\alpha$ still spans, then for any $v_{j}\notin\left(\alpha\right)^{′}$, we have $v_{j}$ is contained in the linear span $\langle \left(\alpha\right)^{′} \rangle$, so $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ is not independent and thus not a basis, a contradiction. Therefore $\alpha$ is a minimal independent list.

(2) We next show that (c) is equivalent to (a):

(c) $\Rightarrow$ (a)

Suppose that $\alpha$ is independent and maximal. So there is no $v\in V$ such that $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n},v$ is still independent. Now, by the contrapositive of Proposition [3.2.2](#x18-29006r2) (b) we must have

$$
v \in \langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{n} \rangle
$$

for every $v\in V$ , i.e.  $\alpha$ spans and is thus a basis.

(a) $\Rightarrow$ (c)

Suppose that $\alpha$ is a basis. If $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n + 1}$ is still independent, then $v_{n + 1}\notin\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{n} \rangle$, so $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ doesn’t span and thus is not a basis, a contradiction. So $\alpha$ is a maximal independent list. □

Theorem 5.  
Let $W$ be a subspace of a finite dimensional vector space $V$ . Then $W$ is finite dimensional and

$$
dim W \leq dim V .
$$

Further, if $dimW=dimV$ , then $W=V$ . Equivalently, if $W$ is a proper subspace, then $dimW<dimV$ .

Proof. For any independent list $w_{1},\dots ,w_{k}\in W$ , we have $k\leq dimV$ by Theorem [3.1.1](MA10210se12.html#x17-28001r1) (a) (see also Proposition [3.2.4](#x18-29013r4)). Hence if we choose a biggest such list, it will be maximal and hence a basis for $W$ by Proposition [3.2.4](#x18-29013r4) (b). We have

$$
dim W = \text{\# vectors in this basis} \leq dim V .
$$

In particular, $W$ is finite dimensional.

If $w_{1},\dots ,w_{m}$ is a maximal independent list in $W$ and $m=dimV$ , then this list is maximal independent in $V$ , by Theorem [3.1.1](MA10210se12.html#x17-28001r1) (a).

Thus

$$
V = \langle w_{1} , \dots  , w_{m} \rangle = W ,
$$

as required. □

Theorem 6.  
Let $V$ be a vector space.

(a)

Any finite spanning list in $V$ contains a basis.

(b)

If $V$ is finite dimensional, then any independent list can be extended to a basis.

Proof.

(a)

Suppose $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ spans $V$ . Consider all sublists that still span $V$ . Choose a smallest one, which must be a minimal spanning list, hence a basis, by Proposition [3.2.4](#x18-29013r4)(a).

(b)

Suppose $V$ has a basis $w_{1},\dots ,w_{m}$ and $v_{1},\dots ,v_{k}$ is independent. Consider all independent subsets of

$$
v_{1} , \dots  , v_{k} , w_{1} , \dots  , w_{m}
$$

that contain $\left\{ v_{1} , \dots  , v_{k} \right\}$. Choose a maximal one.

Then its span must contain $\left\{ w_{1} , \dots  , w_{m} \right\}$ and hence, being a subspace, it contains $\langle w_{1} , \dots  , w_{m} \rangle=V$ . Thus this maximal set is a basis of $V$ . □

Remark 7.  
We can turn the proof into an algorithm of finding a basis as follows.

(a)

Given a spanning list $v_{1},\dots ,v_{n}$ , we can ‘sift’ the list by omitting every $v_{j}$ for which $v_{j}\in\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{j - 1} \rangle$.

We show, by induction, that for every $k=0,\dots ,n$ , the sifted list $\left(\alpha\right)_{k}$ satisfying the following

*   the linear span $\langle \left(\alpha\right)_{k} \rangle=\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{k} \rangle$
*   the sifted list $\left(\alpha\right)_{k}$ is independent.

Case $k=0$ is trivial, where $\left(\alpha\right)_{k}$ is the empty list.

If $v_{k + 1}\in\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{k} \rangle$, then don’t add it and we have $\left(\alpha\right)_{k + 1}=\left(\alpha\right)_{k}$ remains independent with its linear span $=\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{k + 1} \rangle$ by Proposition [3.2.4](#x18-29013r4) (a).

If $v_{k + 1}\notin\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{k} \rangle$, then add it and we have $\left(\alpha\right)_{k + 1}=\left(\alpha\right)_{k},v_{k + 1}$ , which is independent by Proposition [3.2.4](#x18-29013r4) (b) and has its linear span $=\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{k + 1} \rangle$.

Thus the fully sifted list is independent and spans $\langle v_{1} , \dots  , v_{n} \rangle=V$ , so is a basis.

(b)

Sift the list $v_{1},\dots ,v_{k},w_{1},\dots ,w_{m}$ . As $v_{1},\dots ,v_{k}$ are independent, they won’t be omitted and so will be in the full basis.

Example 8.  
Let A be the matrix e.g. 

$$
\begin{align}
 & & \begin{matrix}v_{1} & v_{2} & v_{3} & v_{4}\end{matrix} & \text{} \\ A= & & \begin{pmatrix} \begin{matrix}1 & 3 & 0 & 4 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 2 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\end{matrix} \end{pmatrix} & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

$$
\begin{align}
\langle v_{1} \rangle & = & \langle v_{1} \rangle\text{as}v_{1}\notin\langle ∅ \rangle=\left\{ 0 \right\}\left[ \text{Add } v_{1} \right] & \text{} \\ \langle v_{1} , v_{2} \rangle & = & \langle v_{1} \rangle\text{as}v_{2}\in\langle v_{1} \rangle\left[ \text{Omit } v_{2} \right] & \text{} \\ \langle v_{1} , v_{2} , v_{3} \rangle & = & \langle v_{1} , v_{3} \rangle\text{as}v_{3}\notin\langle v_{1} \rangle\left[ \text{Add } v_{3} \right] & \text{} \\ V=\langle v_{1} , v_{2} , v_{3} , v_{4} \rangle & = & \langle v_{1} , v_{3} \rangle\text{as}v_{4}\in\langle v_{1} , v_{3} \rangle\left[ \text{Omit } v_{4} \right] & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

So we obtain a basis $v_{1},v_{3}$ for the column vector space of $A$ by sifting its column vectors $v_{1},$ $v_{2},$ $v_{3},$ and $v_{4}$ .

Note.  
Bases also exists for any infinite dimensional vector spaces (a key step in the proof of the existence is Zorn’s Lemma), but it is not easy to write down explicitly a basis in general. For instance $ℝ$ over $ℚ$ is infinite dimensional, but no explicit basis is known.

[[next](MA10210se14.html)] [[prev](MA10210se12.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se12.html#tailMA10210se12.html)] [[front](MA10210se13.html)] [[up](MA10210ch3.html#MA10210se13.html)]