### Chapter 13 Non-examinable: mathematics of musical notes

This is a short **non-examinable** chapter on how the theory of Fourier series or Fourier analysis relates to the analysis of audio signals.

If you bang a drum the surface of the drum vibrates (according to the wave equation that we have met already in the course). That vibration is then transferred to the surrounding air molecules. The disturbance propagates through the air, and is received by your ear drums, which in turn vibrate and cause small hairs in your inner ear to be pushed backwards and forwards. This transmits forces to the base of those hairs where they are attached to a cellular membrane. In the membrane the forces cause electrical signals to be generated which are passed into the auditory cortex in the brain. In short, turning the vibrations into electrical impulses enables you to hear the sound.

A similar signal transduction process enables sounds to be recorded using a microphone, as follows. A microphone consists of a diaphragm—a thin piece of material that vibrates when pushed by air molecules. The vibration causes a magnetic component to oscillate, and this movement of a magnet induces a current in an electrical circuit; the changes in current can then be measured and recorded. Thus a sound file is a record of these vibrations as a function of time.

#### 13.1 Make a sound

Let $f$ be the frequency of pure sinusoidal note, i.e. a single sine wave, as measured in hertz, Hz. One hertz is equal to one cycle per second. It has SI units of $s^{-1}$. As a signal, the note is given by


$$ f(t) = \sin (2\pi f t) \quad \text {for $0 \leq t \leq T$}, $$
^eq-13-0


and the amplitude is normalized to one. The digital representation of this note will not be continuous in time, but will instead record the note at a certain sampling frequency, $F_s$. In other words, we evaluate the above function from $t = 0$ to $t = T$ in steps of $\Delta t= 1/F_s$. This is done with the following code.

Fs = 2^(13); T = 5;
t = 0:(1/Fs):T;
f = sin(2*pi*440*t);
sound(f, Fs);

The above plays a $440 \text { Hz}$ note for a duration $T = 5\textrm { s}$ with a sampling frequency of $F_s = 2^{13} \text { Hz}$. This corresponds to the A string on a violin. If we like, we can bring in the E string as well,

f = 0.2*sin(2*pi*440*t) + sin(2*pi*659.3*t);

The two notes are shown in Fig. 13.1.

Figure 13.1: (solid) The A note at 440 Hz and (dash-dotted) the combined AE note at 440 Hz and 659.3 Hz.