#### 13.2 Analysing a sound

We introduce a slightly different notation so that it lines up with conventional signal processing. In our above numerical representation, the note is given by a vector $f(t_0),\ldots , f(t_{K-1})$ of sample values $f(t_k)$ where $t_k=k\Delta t=k/F_s$ for $k=0,\ldots ,K-1$ where $K=F_s T$ is the total number of samples. To convey the discrete nature of the sampling, it is better to visualize the signal by the ‘stem plot’ shown in Fig. 13.2. This shows the first $100$ values, i.e. $0 \leq t \leq 100/(2^{13}) \approx 0.0122$. Check that the samples match the continuous form of $f$ plotted in figure 13.1.

Figure 13.2: The combined AE note at 440 Hz and 659.3 Hz plotted in a stem plot to show the discrete nature.

Let us now write


$$ f(t_k) = \sum _{n=0}^{K-1} \left [ a_n \cos \left (\frac {n\pi t_k}{T}\right ) + b_n \sin \left (\frac {n\pi t_k}{T}\right )\right ] = \sum _{n=0}^{K-1} \left [ a_n \cos \left (\frac {n\pi k}{K}\right ) + b_n \sin \left (\frac {n\pi k}{K}\right )\right ], $$
^eq-13-1


where the coefficients $a_n$ and $b_n$ are the amplitudes of the different frequency components. This looks very familiar - compare it to [[13.2#^eq-12-17]]! We have written our sampled signal $f(t_0),\ldots , f(t_K)$ as a Fourier series where we can think of the domain either as (a discretised version of) $t \in [0,T]$, the time interval that the signal lasted for, or as a discrete set of samples $t_k$ indexed by $k$, where $0 \leq k \leq K-1$ and $K=F_s T$ depends on the sampling rate $F_s$ as well as the time interval $T$.

It is often easier to think of the Fourier coefficients defined by complex variable notation where it is more natural to write


$$ f(t_k) = \sum _{n=0}^{K-1} F_n \exp \left [\mathrm {i} \left (\frac {2 \pi n k}{K}\right )\right ] $$
^eq-13-2


where the Fourier coefficient $F_n$ are now complex valued. For further details see for instance §5.7.2 of the book _Signals and systems_ by Oppenheim, Willsky, and Nawab. The Fourier coefficients $F_n$ are now given by the discrete analog of the expressions we have derived previously, replacing integrals by sums as one would expect for the discrete case. We find


$$ F_n = \frac {1}{K} \sum _{k=0}^{K-1} f(t_k) \exp \left (-\mathrm {i} \, \frac {2\pi n k}{K}\right ). $$
^eq-13-3


This expression for the coefficients $F_n$ is known as the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT). In essence, given any vector of length $K$ with the sample values $f(t_k)$, we can compute directly the Fourier coefficients $F_n$. Apart from having a sum rather than an integral, this compares very closely to the formulas in Question 4 of Problem Sheet 7.

In Matlab, the $F_n$ values can be calculated using the command fft. In Fig. 13.3, we show the spectrum of the AE note. The amplitude $|F_n|$ (denoted by $F_k$ in the figure labelling) gives the measure of how large the $n^\mathrm {th}$ cosine or sine oscillation will be. As expected, after scaling the horizontal axis correctly to show frequencies in Hz, we see a spike at 440 Hz and one at 659.3 Hz.

Figure 13.3: Spectrum of the note combining the A and E frequencies. Vertical dashed lines at 440 Hz and 659.3 Hz line up exactly with the continuous curve that lies very close to the horizontal axis.