#### 13.3 Real notes and sounds

A single sine wave with the frequency of A or E does not in fact sound very much like the note produced by a real musical instrument. The waveform for the note A played on a real violin is shown in Fig. 13.4. It is clearly much more complicated than the pure sinusoidal we considered earlier. The components at higher frequencies add richness to the musical sound (‘overtones’) and permit all the expressiveness that musical performance demands.

Figure 13.4: Waveform $f(t)$ of the note A played on a real violin. The top plot shows time up to 0.2s while the bottom shows a blowup between 0.06s and 0.08s. Note the particularly complex collection of frequencies at the beginning of the note, before a periodic waveform becomes more established from around t=0.09s onwards.

Figure 13.5: Frequency spectrum of the note A played on a real violin. The vertical dashed lines indicate the frequencies 440 Hz, 880 Hz, and 1320 Hz.

The frequency ‘spectrum’ is shown in Fig. 13.5 and clearly shows these ‘overtones’ or harmonics. We no longer have a pure 440 Hz tone; while this is the dominant peak, we also get peaks at multiples of this frequency, i.e. 880 Hz, 1320 Hz and so on. This is what gives instruments their richness in contrast to a pure synthetic sound.

A final remark. The above analysis considered computing frequency components over the entire duration of the sound. What if we want a measure of instantaneous frequency contributions at every moment in time? This leads to the idea of windowing: as the note is played, we restrict our attention to the samples contained in a small ‘window’ of a smaller size, say $[t_* - \Delta , t_* + \Delta ]$ in time. We can then compute the DFT just over this window. Then we move the window to the right (i.e. we increment the centre time point $t_*$ but keep $\Delta$ fixed) and repeat the procedure. We end up with a DFT for each choice of $t_*$ and we can then plot these side by side as $t_*$ increases to see how the frequency content of the signal changes over time. This is known as a spectrogram, see figure 13.6.

Figure 13.6: Spectrogram of the note A played on a violin, constructed using Matlab’s spectrogram function. The horizontal axis (time) indicates the centre points $t_*$ of the windows used for computing the DFT, and the vertical exis is frequency (in kHz). Red = high amplitude frequency components, blue = low amplitude components, as indicated by the colour scale bar on the right hand side.

The spectrogram illustrates the broad set of frequencies present in the signal at the start of the note, before the dominant frequency and its multiples start to emerge slightly later. The amplitude of the higher harmonics generally decrease as frequency increases, although they change a little over time, as the note resonances with the physical characteristics of the instrument.