# Symmetry of the Hessian

Suppose that $U \sub \R^n$ is an [[1.1 Analytic Space]] and $f \colon U \to \mathbb{R}$ is a function such that all the first and second derivatives exists and are continuous in $U$. Then,

$$
(Hf(x))^T = Hf(x)
$$

for all $x \in U$.

In other words, under the assumptions of the theorem, equation 

$$
\frac{\p^2 f}{\p x_j \p x_k} = \frac{\p^2 f}{\p x_k \p x_j}
$$

holds for $j, k \in J_n$. The assumption on the continuity of the partial derivatives is required, as the statement is not true otherwise.

## Proof

Fix $x \in U$. As $U$ is [[Open Set|Open]], there exists $r > 0$ such that $B_{2r}(x) \sub U$.

Choose $h, \tilde{h} \in (-r, r)$ and consider the function (of one variable) $\phi \colon (-r, r ) \to \mathbb{R}$ given by

$$
\phi(s) = f(x + se_j + \tilde{h}e_k) - f(x + se_j).
$$

Then $\phi$ is differentiable with

$$
\phi'(s) = \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_j}(x + se_j + \tilde{h}e_k) - \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_j}(x + se_j).
$$

By the [[Mean Value Theorem]], there exists a number $s_1 \in [0, h]$ such that $\phi(h) - \phi(0) = h \phi'(s_1)$. That is,

$$
\begin{multline}
f(x + he_j + \tilde{h}e_k) - f(x + he_j) - f(x + \tilde{h}e_k) + f(x) \\ = h\left(\frac{\partial f}{\partial x_j}(x + s_1 e_j + \tilde{h}e_k) - \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_j}(x + s_1 e_j)\right). 
\tag{3.2}
\end{multline}
$$

^eq-3-2

We now apply the [[Mean Value Theorem]] in a similar way to the function $\psi\colon (-r, r) \to \mathbb{R}$ given by

$$
\begin{equation*} \psi(t) = \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_j}(x + s_1 e_j + te_k). \end{equation*}
$$

This yields a number $t_1$ between $0$ and $\tilde{h}$ such that

$$
\begin{equation*} \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_j}(x + s_1 e_j + \tilde{h}e_k) - \frac{\partial f}{\partial x_j}(x + s_1 e_j) = \tilde{h} \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x_k \partial x_j}(x + s_1 e_j + t_1 e_k). \end{equation*}
$$

Inserting this into the previous equation [[#^eq-3-2|(3.2)]], we obtain

$$
\begin{equation*} f(x + he_j + \tilde{h}e_k) - f(x + he_j) - f(x + \tilde{h}e_k) + f(x) = h\tilde{h} \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x_k \partial x_j}(x + s_1 e_j + t_1 e_k). \end{equation*}
$$

Repeating the same procedure with $j$ and $k$ exchanged will give two numbers $s_2$ and $t_2$, with $s_2$ between $0$ and $h$ and $t_2$ between $0$ and $\tilde{h}$, such that

$$
\begin{equation*} f(x + he_j + \tilde{h}e_k) - f(x + he_j) - f(x + \tilde{h}e_k) + f(x) = h\tilde{h} \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x_j \partial x_k}(x + s_2 e_j + t_2 e_k). \end{equation*}
$$

Hence

$$
\begin{equation*} \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x_k \partial x_j}(x + s_1 e_j + t_1 e_k) = \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x_j \partial x_k}(x + s_2 e_j + t_2 e_k). \end{equation*}
$$

Finally we use the continuity of the partial derivatives. As we let $h, \tilde{h} \to 0$, the corresponding numbers $s_1, t_1, s_2, t_2$ will tend to $0$ as well. In the limit, we obtain the equation

$$
\begin{equation*} \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x_k \partial x_j}(x) = \frac{\partial^2 f}{\partial x_j \partial x_k}(x). \end{equation*}
$$

As this holds true for every pair of indices $j, k$, this proves the symmetry of $Hf(x)$.
