# Ideal

A **nonempty** subset $I$ of a [[Ring]] $R$ is called an **Ideal** in $R$ if and only if $I$ is a [[Subgroup]] of $(R, +)$ such that 

$$ \Forall a \in I, r \in R :\quad ra \in I \land ar \in I$$

## Quick Check

To check that $I$ is an ideal, it is enough to check that

1. $a - b\in I$ if $a, b \in I$, and
2. $ra \in I$ and $ar\in I$ if $a\in I$ and $r\in R$.
    
This is a short cut similar to I.8.

## One Sided Ideals

What we have defined is a two-sided ideal. It is also possible, and occasionally useful, to define a left ideal to be a subgroup $L$ of $(R, +)$ for which $ra \in L$ whenever $r\in R$ and $a\in L$ (but perhaps $ar \notin L$). Obviously if $R$ is a commutative ring, left ideal, right ideals and two-sided ideals are all the same thing.

## In [[Commutative Ring|Commutative Rings]]

If $R$ is a Commutative Ring, there is a slightly different way to think about ideals: an ideal $I$ in a Commutative Ring $R$ is a non-empty subset that is closed under taking [[Linear Combinations]] with $R$ coefficients. That is

$$
\Forall a, b \in I,
\text { and }
\Forall r, s \in R
\text{ we have }
ra + sb
\in I.
$$

This is just a rewording of I.38 in the commutative case.

## Example

Let $R$ be a commutative ring and let $a\in R$. The set $aR=\{ar \mid r\in R\}$, also sometimes denoted $\latt {a}$ if the ring $R$ is clear from the context, is an ideal in $R$. It is called the _ideal generated by_ $a$, and every ideal of this form is called a _principal ideal_.

## Lemmas on Ideals

Let $\sim$ be a [[Congruence Relation]] on a ring $R$. Then $[0]$ is an ideal in the ring $R$. Moreover:

*   (i) for $a, b\in R$, we have $a\sim b \iff a-b\in [0]$; and
    
*   (ii) the congruence classes of $\sim$ are the cosets of $[0]$, i.e., $[a]=a+[0]$ for all $a\in R$.
    

**1.43 Proposition.** Let $I$ be an ideal in $R$, and define $\sim$ on $R$ by $a\sim b$ if and only if $a-b\in I$. Then $\sim$ is a congruence relation in which the equivalence classes are the cosets of $I$ in $R$, i.e., we have $[a]=a+I$ for all $a\in R$. In particular, $[0]=I$.

Proof: We first show that $\sim$ is an equivalence relation. Let $a,\, b,\, c\in R$. Then $a-a = 0 \in I$, so $a\sim a$, so $\sim$ is reflexive. If $a\sim b$ then $a-b\in I$ and hence $b-a= -(a-b)\in I$ because $(I,+)$ is a group according to Definition I.38. This gives $b\sim a$, so $\sim$ is symmetric. Finally if $a\sim b$ and $b\sim c$ then $a-b,b-c\in I$. As $I$ is closed under addition, it follows that $(a-b)+(b-c)=a-c\in I$ and hence $a\sim c$. This shows that $\sim$ is transitive, so $\sim$ is an equivalence relation.

To prove that $\sim$ is a congruence, let $a, b, a’, b’\in R$ and suppose that $a\sim a’$ and $b\sim b’$. Then $a-a’,b-b’\in I$. Since $I$ is an ideal, we have

$$ (a+b)-(a’+b’)=(a-a’)+(b-b’)\in I $$

by the first defining property of an ideal, so $a+b\sim a’+b’$. Finally, by adding $0 = -ab’+ab’$ below, we get

$$ ab-a’b’=ab+\big [-ab’+ab’\big ]-a’b’=a(b-b’)+(a-a’)b’\in I $$

by the second defining property of an ideal, so $ab\sim a’b’$ as required.

For $a\in R$, the equivalence class of $a$ is

$\seteqnumber{0}{}{0}$

$$ \begin{eqnarray*} [a] := \{b\in R \mid b\sim a\} & = & \{b\in R \mid b-a\in I\} \\ & = & \{b\in R \mid \exists \; i\in I \text { such that }b-a=i\} \\ & = & \{a+i \mid i\in I\} \\ & = & a+I \end{eqnarray*} $$

as claimed.

**1.44** Proposition I.43 says that ideals determine congruence relations, and it provides the converse to Lemma I.42. These results together establish a one-to-one correspondence between congruences on a ring and ideals in that ring. We may therefore change our point of view when considering quotient rings: then next definition simply rewrites the definition of the quotient ring $R/{\sim }$ constructed in Theorem I.37 directly in terms of the ideal $I$ associated to the congruence class $\sim$.
