# 3.3 The Cauchy criterion of integrability

When determining whether a certain function is integrable, it is often easier to use the following criterion, which can be thought of as a reformulation of the definition.

## Theorem 3.13 (Cauchy criterion of integrability).

Let $f: [a,b]\to \R$ be a bounded function. Then $f$ is Riemann integrable if and only if :

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{4}%%

$$
\begin{align} \forall \varepsilon >0 \ \exists P \text { subdivision of }[a,b] \text { such that } U(f,P)- L(f,P) < \varepsilon . \end{align}
$$

### Proof

Let us assume first that (3.5) holds. Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given and use (3.5) to find a subdivision $P$ of $[a,b]$ such that

$$
U(f,P)- L(f,P) < \varepsilon .
$$

Then

$$
\begin {aligned} \overline {\int _a^b} f & = \inf \{ \, U(f,Q) | Q \text { is a subdivision of $[a,b]$ } \} \leq U(f,P ) \leq L(f,P) +\varepsilon . \end {aligned}
$$

But $L(f,P) \leq \underline {\int _a^b} f$ so

$$
\overline {\int _a^b} f \leq \underline {\int _a^b} f + \varepsilon .
$$

But $\varepsilon >0$ is arbitrary, and hence

$$
\overline {\int _a^b} f \leq \underline {\int _a^b} f .
$$

The inequality $\overline {\int _a^b} f \geq \underline {\int _a^b} f$, is always true and we conclude that $\overline {\int _a^b} f = \underline {\int _a^b} f$, and hence $f$ is Riemann integrable.

Suppose now that $f$ is Riemann integrable and let us prove (3.5). Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given. By the properties of infimum, and the definition of $\overline {\int _a^b} f$ in (3.2) there is subdivision $P_1$ of $[a,b]$ such that

$$
U(f,P_1) \leq \overline {\int _a^b} f + \frac {\varepsilon }{2}.
$$

By the properties of supremum, and the definition of $\underline {\int _a^b} f$ in (3.3) there is subdivision $P_2$ of $[a,b]$ such that

$$
L(f,P_2) \geq \underline {\int _a^b} f - \frac {\varepsilon }{2}.
$$

Now let $P = P_1 \cup P_2$. so that $P$ is a refinement of $P_1$ and of $P_2$. By the properties of refinement (Lemma 3.6)

$$
U(f,P) \leq U(f,P_1) , \quad L(f,P) \geq L(f,P_2) .
$$

Combining with the previous inequalities we get that

$$
U(f,P) \leq U(f,P_1) \leq \overline {\int _a^b} f + \frac {\varepsilon }{2}
$$

$$
L(f,P) \geq L(f,P_2) \geq \underline {\int _a^b} f - \frac {\varepsilon }{2}.
$$

Then

$$
\begin {aligned} U(f,P) - L(f,P) &\leq \overline {\int _a^b} f + \frac {\varepsilon }{2} - \Bigl ( \underline {\int _a^b} f - \frac {\varepsilon }{2} ) = \varepsilon \end {aligned}
$$

because $\overline {\int _a^b} f = \underline {\int _a^b} f$. This proves (3.5). □

### Remark 3.14

In several places we will need to prove that a bounded function $f: [a,b]\to \R$ is integrable and find a formula that says something about $\int _a^b f$. Once we prove that $f$ is integrable, given $\varepsilon >0$ there is a subdivision $P$ of $[a,b]$ such that

$$
U(f,P) - L(f,P) < \varepsilon .
$$

Hence

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{5}%%

$$
\begin{align} L (f,P) &\leq \int _a^b f \leq L (f,P) + \varepsilon \\ \nonumber U (f,P) - \varepsilon &\leq \int _a^b f \leq U (f,P). \end{align}
$$

We can use these formulas to approximate the integral $\int _a^b f$ by either lower or upper Riemann sums.

### Remark 3.15

. The Cauchy criterion of integrability, Theorem 3.13 can also be formulated in terms of sequences of subdivisions: a bounded function $f: [a,b]\to \R$ is integrable if and only if there is a sequence $(P_n)_{n\in \N }$ of subdivisions of $[a,b]$ such that

$$
\lim _{n\to \infty } U(f,P_n) - L(f,P_n) = 0.
$$

In this case,

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{6}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \int _a^b f = \lim _{n\to \infty } U(f,P_n) = \lim _{n\to \infty } L(f,P_n) . \end{align*}
$$

Here is an application of the Cauchy criterion.

## Proposition 3.16

Let $f: [a,b]\to \R$ be monotone increasing or decreasing. Then $f$ is integrable.

### Proof

We will do the proof in the case that $f$ is monotone decreasing.

Let $P = \{ x_0, x_1,\ldots ,x_n\}$, $a= x_0<x_1<\ldots < x_n=b$ be a subdivision of $[a,b]$. We need to estimate $U(f,P) - L(f,P)$. For this first we rewrite

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{6}%%

$$
\begin{align*} U(f,P) - L(f,P) &= \sum _{j=1}^n ( \sup _{I_j} f ) |I_j| - \sum _{i=1}^n ( \inf _{ I_j } f ) |I_j| =\sum _{j=1}^n ( \sup _{I_j} f -\inf _{ I_j } ) |I_j| , \end{align*}
$$

where $I_j = [x_{j-1},x_j]$. Since $f$ is monotone decreasing

$$
\sup _{[x_{j-1},x_j]} f = f(x_{j-1}) , \qquad \inf _{[x_{j-1},x_j]} f = f(x_j)
$$

and therefore

$$
\begin {aligned} U(f,P) - L(f,P) &= \sum _{j=1}^n ( f(x_{j-1}) - f(x_j) ) (x_j-x_{j-1}) \end {aligned}
$$

We take a special subdivision $P_n = \{x_0, x_1, \ldots , x_n\}$ where

$$
x_j = a + j \frac {b-a}{n}, \quad j \in \{0,1,\ldots ,n\}.
$$

$and hence (this is the uniform subdivision into$n \in \N$subintervals with$n+1$points). Note that$x*j -x*{j-1} = \frac {b-a}{n}.

$$
\begin {aligned} U(f,P_n) - L(f,P_n) &= \frac {b-a}{n}\sum _{j=1}^n ( f(x_{j-1}) - f(x_j) ) = \frac {b-a}{n} ( f(a) - f(b) ) \end {aligned}
$$

Given $\varepsilon >0$ we take $n \in \N$ large so that

$$
\frac {b-a}{n} ( f(a) - f(b) ) < \varepsilon
$$

and then

$$
U(f,P_n) - L(f,P_n) < \varepsilon .
$$

We deduce that $f$ is integrable from the Cauchy criterion. □
