# 3.4 Continuous functions are integrable

We saw that not every function is integrable. First, we need the function to be bounded to define the notion of integrability. But even for bounded functions, having infinitely many discontinuities can cause problems.

We prove here that every continuous function on a closed bounded interval is integrable.

## Theorem 3.17

If $f: [a,b]\to \R$ is continuous on $[a, b]$, then $f$ is integrable on $[a, b]$.

For the proof we will use the notion of uniform continuity.

## Definition 3.18

Let $I\subset \R$ be an interval. A function $f: I\to \R$ is called uniformly continuous on $I$ if

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{6}%%

$$
\begin{align} \forall \varepsilon >0 \quad \exists \delta >0 \quad \forall x_1,x_2\in I \quad |x_1-x_2|<\delta \Rightarrow |f(x_1)-f(x_2)|<\varepsilon . \end{align}
$$

### Remark 3.19

1.  If $f: I\to \R$ is uniformly continuous on $I$ then it is continuous on $I$.

2.  In general the reciprocal is not true. For example, $f(x) = \frac {1}{x}$, $f: (0,1)\to \R$ is not uniformly continuous on $(0,1)$. Similarly $f(x) = e^x$, $f: \R \to \R$ is not uniformly continuous on $\R$.

### Remark 3.20

Let us explore a bit more the relation between continuity and uniform continuity. Suppose that $I$ is an interval and $f: I\to \R$. Then $f$ is continuous at all points $x_1\in I$ if and only if

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{7}%%

$$
%%\begin{align}%%
\begin{aligned} & \forall x_1 \in I \quad \forall \varepsilon >0 \quad \exists \delta >0 \quad \\ & \forall x_1,x_2\in I \quad |x_1-x_2|<\delta \Rightarrow |f(x_1)-f(x_2)|<\varepsilon . \end {aligned} %%\end{align}%%
$$

The difference between (3.7) and (3.8), is that in the latter, $\delta$ normally depends on $x_1$ and $\varepsilon$. Although $\delta$ is not uniquely defined, for a fixed $\varepsilon >0$ we may choose $\delta = \delta (x_1)$. It may happen that $\displaystyle \inf _{x_1\in I} \delta (x_1) = 0$. On the contrary, property (3.7) says that one can choose a fixed (or uniform) $\delta >0$ independent of $x_1$.

Let us show that indeed $\displaystyle \inf _{x_1\in I} \delta (x_1) = 0$ can happen. Consider $f : (0,1) \to \R$, $f(x) = \frac {1}{x}$. Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given and let us try to find $\delta (x_1)>0$ with the property

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{8}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \forall x_1,x_2\in (0,1) \quad |x_1-x_2|<\delta \Rightarrow |f(x_1)-f(x_2)|<\varepsilon . \end{align*}
$$

Since $f(x) = \frac {1}{x}$ is strictly decreasing, we see that for $f^{-1}(f(x_1)-\varepsilon ) < x_2 < f^{-1}(f(x_2)+\varepsilon )$ we get $|f(x_1)-f(x_2)|<\varepsilon$. Thus we are led to take

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{8}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \delta (x_1) = \min \Bigl ( \frac {1}{\frac {1}{x_1} - \varepsilon } - x_1, x_1 - \frac {1}{\frac {1}{x_1}+\varepsilon } \Bigr ) = \frac {1}{\frac {1}{x_1} - \varepsilon } - x_1 . \end{align*}
$$

This is actually the best (largest) $\delta$ that one can choose. But we check that

$$
\inf \_{x_1\in (0,1) } \delta (x_1) = 0.
$$

Indeed,

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{8}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \lim *{x_1\to 0^+ } \delta (x_1) &= \lim *{x*1\to 0^+ } \Bigl ( \frac {1}{\frac {1}{x_1} - \varepsilon } - x_1 \Bigr ) \\ &= \lim *{x_1\to 0^+ } \frac {\varepsilon x_1^2}{1-\varepsilon x_1} =0. \end{align*}
$$

— $\circ$ —

Although in general continuity of $f$ is not equivalent to uniform continuity, the following is true.

## Theorem 3.21

If $f: [a,b]\to \R$ is continuous on $[a,b]$ then it is uniformly continuous on $[a,b]$.

### Remark 3.22

• In Theorem 3.21 the hypotheses that $f$ is continuous on a bounded and closed interval are essential.

• Since uniform continuity implies continuity, from the previous theorem we obtain the equivalence, for $f: [a,b]\to \R$,

$$
\text {$f$ is continuous on $[a,b]$} \quad \Longleftrightarrow \quad \text {$f$ is uniformly continuous on $[a,b]$.}
$$

### Proof

of Theorem 3.21. We prove the theorem by contradiction, assuming that $f$ is not uniformly continuous on $[a,b]$. The negation of uniform continuity reads

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{8}%%

$$
%%\begin{align\*}%%
\begin{aligned} & \exists \varepsilon >0 \quad \forall \delta >0 \quad \exists x_1,x_2\in [a,b] \text { such that } \\ & |x_1-x_2|<\delta \text { and } |f(x_1)-f(x_2)|\geq \varepsilon . \end {aligned} %%\end{align*}%%
$$

Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given by the above property of $f$, that is, the following holds:

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{8}%%

$$
\label {1} \left \{
\begin{aligned} & \forall \delta >0 \quad \exists x_1,x_2\in [a,b] \text { such that } \\ & |x_1-x_2|<\delta \text { and } |f(x_1)-f(x_2)|\geq \varepsilon . \end {aligned} \right.
$$

For any $n\in \N$ we apply (3.9) with $\delta = \frac {1}{n}$ and find points $x_n$, $z_n \in [a,b]$ such that

$$
|x_n-z_n| < \frac {1}{n} \text { and } |f(x_n)-f(z_n)|\geq \varepsilon .
$$

The sequences $(x_n)_n$ and $(z_n)_n$ are contained in $[a,b]$ and are therefore bounded. By the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, we can find a subsequence $(x_{n_k})_k$ such that

$$
x = \lim _{k\to \infty } x_{n_k} \quad \text {exists.}
$$

We apply the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem again to the sequence $(z_{n_k})_k$ and find a subsequence $(z_{n_{k_j}})_{j}$ such that

$$
z = \lim _{j\to \infty } z_{n\_{k_j}} \quad \text {exists.}
$$

In what follows we work with

$$
\tilde x*j = x*{n*{k_j}} , \quad \tilde z_j = z*{n\_{k_j}}
$$

so that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{9}%%

$$
\label {2} \tilde x_j\to x, \quad \tilde z_j \to z, \quad \text {as } j\to \infty .
$$

We note that from

$$
|x_n-z_n|<\frac {1}{n}
$$

we deduce that

$$
\left | \tilde x*j - \tilde z_j\right | < \frac {1}{n*{k_j}}\to 0\quad \text {as }j\to \infty .
$$

This and the convergence (3.10) implies that $x= z$.

We use now the continuity of $f$ to obtain

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{10}%%

$$
\label {3} f(x) = \lim _{j\to \infty } f(\tilde x_j) = \lim _{j\to \infty } f(\tilde z_j).
$$

But we have $|f(x_n) -f(z_n) |\geq \varepsilon$ for all $n\in \N$, and this implies

$$
|f(\tilde x_j) - f (\tilde z_j) | \geq \varepsilon \quad \forall j\in \N .
$$

We let $j\to \infty$ in this inequality and use the convergence (3.11) to find that

$$
|f(x) - f (x) | \geq \varepsilon ,
$$

from which $\varepsilon \leq 0$. But this is impossible, since $\varepsilon >0$. □

### Proof

of Theorem 3.17.

By the Weierstrass extremal value theorem, Theorem 1.31, $f$ is bounded on $[a, b]$, so its upper and lower sums are well-defined. We will use the Cauchy criterion for integrability, that is, given $\varepsilon >0$, we will find a subdivision $P$ of $[a,b]$ such that $U(f,P) - L(f,P) <\varepsilon$.

Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given. Then there exists $\delta >0$ such that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{11}%%

$$
\label {4} \forall y,z \in [a,b] \quad |y-z| < \delta \Rightarrow |f(y)-f(z)|<\frac {\varepsilon }{b-a+1} .
$$

Given the $\delta >0$, from the uniform continuity (3.12), we let $n\in \N$ be such that $\frac {b-a}{n}<\delta$. Then we define the uniform subdivision of $[a,b]$

$$
P_n = \{x_0,x_1,\ldots ,x_n\} , \quad x_j = a + \frac {b-a}{n}j, \quad j\in \{0,1,\ldots ,n\}.
$$

Let $I_j = [x_{j-1},x_j]$, $j=1,\ldots ,n$ and recall that

$$
U(f,P*n) = \sum *{j=1}^n ( \sup _{I_j} f ) |I_j|, \quad L(f,P_n) = \sum _{j=1}^n ( \inf \_{I_j} f ) |I_j| .
$$

Subtracting

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{12}%%

$$
\label {5} U(f,P*n) - L(f,P_n) = \sum *{j=1}^n ( \sup _{ I_j } f - \inf _{I_j} f ) |I_j|.
$$

For $y,z \in I_j$ we have $|y-z|\leq \frac {b-a}{n}<\delta$. The uniform continuity (3.12) implies that

$$
|f(y)-f(z)| < \frac {\varepsilon }{b-a+1} , \qquad \forall y,z \in I_j
$$

In particular

$$
f(z) - \frac {\varepsilon }{b-a+1} < f (y) < f(z) + \frac {\varepsilon }{b-a+1} \qquad \forall y,z \in I_j.
$$

Taking supremum over $y \in I_j$ and infimum over $z \in I_j$ we get

$$
\sup _{I_j} f - \inf _{I_j} f \leq \frac {\varepsilon }{b-a+1} .
$$

Replacing this in the expression for $U(f,P_n)-L(f,P_n)$ (3.13) we obtain

$$
\begin {aligned} U(f,P*n) - L(f,P_n) & = \sum *{j=1}^n ( \sup _{I_j} f - \inf _{ I*j } f) | I_j | \\ & \leq \frac {\varepsilon }{b-a+1} \sum *{j=1}^n |I_j| \\ &= \frac {\varepsilon }{b-a+1}(b-a) = \varepsilon . \end {aligned}
$$

This proves that $f$ satisfies the Cauchy criterion and hence it is Riemann integrable in $[a,b]$.

□

$$
$$
