# 3.3 2nd order Taylor's Theorem in Higher Dimensions

Let $U \sub \R^n$ be an [[1.1 Analytic Space]] and $f : U \to \R$ a function with [[Continuous]] [[1.2 Partial Derivative|Partial Derivatives]] up to 2nd order. Letting $x \in U$.

## First Form

Suppose that $y \in U$ and consider the line segment,

$$
L = \set{sy + (1 - s)x \mathrel| s \in [0, 1]}
$$

between $x$ and $y$. If $L \subseteq U$ (ie the function is define along the line, and thus by the premise continuous along it) then there exists $z \in L$ such that

$$
f(y) =
f(x) + df(x) (y - x) + \frac 12 (y - x) \cdot Hf(z) (y - x).
$$
^eq-3-3

## Second Form

Suppose that $r > 0$ is such that $B_r(x) \subseteq U$. Then there exists a function $R \colon B_r(x) \to \mathbb{R}$ such that $\lim_{y \to x} R(y) = 0$ and

> I dont understand why we are creating a ball here, $L$ is open by definition so $r > 0$ will always exist. So why not choose L in general? #todo 
> See this is why we should keep notes around...

$$
f(y) = f(x) + df(x) (y - x) + \frac{1}{2} (y - x) \cdot Hf(x) (y - x) + R(y) \|y - x\|^2 \tag{3.4}
$$
^eq-3-4

for all $y \in B_r(x)$. These are direct analogues of [[3 Second Order Derivatives#^aa750e]] and [[3 Second Order Derivatives#^09f422]] respectively.

> #todo What is this $R$ form we are seeing – we need to investigate Analysis 1B.

## Proof

The idea is to apply Taylor's theorem for functions of one variable to

$$
g(s) = f(sy + (1 - s)x).
$$

If we differentiate with respect to $s$, we obtain the formula

$$
g'(s) = df(sy + (1 - s)x) (y - x) = \sum_{j = 1}^n \parfrac{f}{x_j} (sy + (1 - s)x) (y_j - x_j)
$$

by the chain rule ([[2.5 Chain Rule for Real Functions]]) and [[2.3 Relation between the Jacobian and Derivative]]). Similarly,

$$
\begin{align}
g''(s)
&= \sum_{j, k \in J_n}
	\frac{\p^2 f}{\p x_j\p x_k} (sy + (1 - s)x) \cdot (y_j - x_j)(y_k - x_k)
\\
&= (y - x) \cdot Hf(sy + (1 - s)x) (y - x).
\end{align}
$$

If $L \sub U$ then this is valid in at least an interval in $s$ containing $[0, 1]$ and the further second derivative is [[Continuous]]. Hence we may apply Taylor's theorem for functions of one variable, which gives the first statement.

If $B_r(x) \subseteq U$, then the conclusion from the first statement applies to any $y \in B_r(x)$. Hence for every $y \in B_r(x)$, there exists $z_y \in \{sy + (1 - s)x\colon s \in [0, 1]\}$ such that [[#^eq-3-3]] holds true for $z_y$ instead of $z$. Define

$$
\begin{equation*} R(y) = \frac{1}{2\|y - x\|^2} (y - x) \cdot \bigl(Hf(z_y) - Hf(x)\bigr) (y - x) \end{equation*}
$$

for $y \in B_r(x) \setminus \{x\}$ and $R(x) = 0$. Then [[#^eq-3-4]] holds true. As the second partial derivatives of $f$ are continuous, it also follows that

$$
|R(y)| \le \|Hf(z_y) - Hf(x)\|_{\mathrm{op}} \to 0
$$

as $y \to x$. This proves the second statement.
