## Example of Solving the Wave Equation

(Examination of $u_n(x,t)$ in eqn [[#^eq-16-10]]).  It is instructive to examine physically what the individual separable solutions, $u_n$, look like.

For simplicity consider a string of length $L = \pi$. In [[#^eq-16-10]], set $A_1=1$ and $B_1=0$. Then we have


$$ u_1(x,t)=\sin (x) \cos (ct). $$

^eq-16-10


The function $\cos (kt)$ has period $2\pi /k$ so $\cos (ct)$ has period $T = 2\pi /c$. Consequently at times $t = 0$ and $t= T$, $\cos (0)=\cos (2\pi )=1$ and so at each point $x$ the function $u_1(x,t)$ returns to its original value $u_1(x,0)$ where

$$ u_1(x, \, 0)= u_1(x, \, T)= \sin x. $$

Halfway through the temporal period, at $t = T/2$, we have $\cos (\pi ) = -1$ and so

$$ u(x, T/2) = - \sin (x). $$

Figure 16.1 shows the solution [[#^eq-16-11]] plotted at $t=0, \, T/2, \, T$. This is a _standing wave_. Standing waves can be described by the number of nodes (sometimes called ‘nodal points’) and antinodes that they have. A node is a point $x^*$ where the standing wave oscillation has zero amplitude, i.e. $u(x^*,t)=0$ for all $t>0$, while an anti-node, as the name suggests, is a point $x^*$ at which the oscillation has maximum amplitude. In this case we see that there is exactly one anti-node in $[0, \pi ]$ (at $x^*=\pi /2$) and no interior nodes.

Consider now the second mode $u_2(x,t)$ taking (WLOG) $A_2 =1$ and $B_2 = 0$. Then [[#^eq-16-10]] becomes


$$ u_2(x,t)=\sin (2x) \cos (2ct). $$

^eq-16-11


The period of $\cos (2ct)$ is $T = \pi /c$. So when $t=0$ and $t=T$

$$ u_2(x,0)= u_2(x, T) = \sin (2x). $$

Similarly, at a time halfway through the period, $t= T/2$,

$$ u_2(x, T/2) = -\sin (2x). $$

We see that the $n = 2$ mode is a standing wave solution with one node (at $x=\pi /2$) and two antinodes. The pattern continues for larger values of $n$.

These sinusoidal standing waves are often referred to as _normal modes_, and the longest-wavelength, lowest frequency mode is known as the _fundamental mode_; it is sketched in figure 16.1.