## Boundary Value Problem

A **Boundary Value Problem** (BVP) for a PDE has three ingredients:

1. A PDE.
2. A set of values for the *Independent Variables* on which the PDE is posed; we will call this the **Domain**.
3. Conditions that the solution must satisfy on the **boundary of the domain** (*“boundary conditions"*).

If the PDE involves time $t$, then it is natural to think of the PDE as evolving a solution $u(x,y,t_1)$ from one time point $t_1$ to another $u(x,y,t_2)$ at a later time $t_2$. With this perspective we call the boundary conditions that correspond to specifying the starting values of $u$ and its derivatives _initial conditions_. 

Depending on the particular domain, some textbooks and references then call problems of this kind _initial value problems_, or _initial-boundary value problems_. Despite this variety of names, what is meant should be clear in the mathematical statement of the problem.

**Remark:** [Initial and boundary conditions for ODEs] Recall that the solution of the 1st order ODE

$$ \diff {y}{t} =a y $$

(where $a$ is constant) has one arbitrary constant: it is $y(t)=A\mathrm {e}^{at}$. Therefore we need one condition, for example $y(0)=c_1$, to determine the solution uniquely. If the $t$ variable corresponds to time, the ODE is posed for $t \geq 0$, and the condition is given at $t=0$ (as above), then it is natural to call this condition an _initial condition_.

Recall that the solution of the 2nd order ODE


$$ \diff {^2y}{t^2} = ay $$

^eq-14-5


(where $a$ is constant) has two arbitrary constants, and therefore we need two conditions to fix them, for example $y(0)= c_1$ and $y’(0)=c_2$. Again, if the $t$ variable corresponds to time, the ODE is posed for $t \geq 0$, and both conditions are at $t=0$, then it is natural to call these conditions _initial conditions_. An alternative would be that our conditions are at different timepoints, for example $y(0)=c_1$ and $y(1)=c_2$ and we are interested in finding the form of the solution $y(t)$ for $0 \leq t \leq 1$.

When the independent variable corresponds to space instead of time, one often encounters the ODE [[14 Boundary Condition Classifications#^eq-14-6]] posed on a finite interval, i.e. the ODE is


$$ \diff {^2y}{x^2} = ay \quad \text {for} \quad x \in [0, L]. $$

^eq-14-6


Such spatial problems perhaps more naturally are constrained through the imposition of one condition at two spatial points, e.g. the endpoints $x=0$ and $x=L$ on the boundary of the domain. Typical boundary conditions for [[14 Boundary Condition Classifications#^eq-14-7]] may include specifying values for $\{y(0), \, y(L)\}$, or $\{y’(0), \, y’(L)\}$, or $\{y(0), \, y’(L)\}$, and so on.

**Remark:** It is also useful to note that we tend not to use constraints involving derivatives of the same order as, or higher than, the order of the PDE itself. For example, in this case the value of $y’’(x)$ is related by the ODE itself to the value of $y$ on the boundary because the ODE relates the second derivative $y’’$ to $ay$ and so we can turn a boundary condition involving $y’’$ into one involving just $y$. The same is true for PDEs.

###### Definition 14.12

(Dirichlet, Neumann, and mixed (Robin) boundary conditions).  There are three very common types of boundary condition. Consider a boundary-value problem defined on a domain $D$ with (piecewise-smooth) boundary $\p D$. Let $\p D_i$ be a part of $\p D$.