https://uniofbath.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=edd1055c-81e3-4437-bd42-acf0008e1c69

## [[Extrinsic Semiconductors]]

Whereas [[Intrinsic Semiconductors]] are pure crystal semiconductors, with a low concentration of [[Electron Holes|Holes]] and [[Conduction Band]] electrons[^1], both of which are equal and vary with temperature; we now consider [[Extrinsic Semiconductors]] which have been modified by [[Doping]] making them impure. This will break the explicit equations we have obtained thus far for the concentrations of [[Electron Holes|Holes]] and Conduction Electrons.

[^1]: For context this is about $1$ in $10^{12}$ electrons.

Firstly, the [[Electrical Conductivity]] of a [[Semiconductors|Semiconductor]] is given by,

$$
\sigma = \frac{n e^2 \tau_e}{m_e^*} + \frac{p e^2 \tau_h}{m_h^*}
$$

At first glance this would imply that the introduction of impurities would decrease the conductivity of the semiconductor. However the introduction of the Dopant increases the concentrations conductors substantially overcoming this effect by far.

This process also gives us a wide range of control over the concentrations at different temperatures.

### [[Doping]]

Dopant atoms substitute for semiconductor atoms taking their place in the [[Crystal Structure]], they are thus impurities. They come in two types,

- Electron Donors leading to [[N-Type Extrinsic Semiconductors]]
- Electron Acceptors leading to [[P-Type Extrinsic Semiconductors]].

### [[P-Type Extrinsic Semiconductors]]

P-type semiconductors are made my doping with atoms with an additional **weakly bound valance electron**, this is normally the replacement of a Group 4 atom (eg. Silicon) with a Group 5 atom (eg. Phosphorus). This weakly bound atom is easily thermally excited into the [[Conduction Band]] leaving behind an **ionised donor atom**.

## [[Hydrogen Model for Donors]]

The addition of the Group 5 atom to the crystal leads to the addition of one extra electron and proton to the otherwise pure periodic crystal. This extra electron will orbit the donor atom in a manner similar to a single electron hydrogen atom, however with some important difference.

### Divergence from Hydrogen

1. Firstly the extra electron is not orbiting a [[Source Free Vacuum]], instead it is experiencing a [[Periodic Potential]] from the lattice.
	- This means we must replace the mass of the electron with an effective mass caused by said lattice.
2. This also screens to the effect of the ionised donor core atom which is represented with the higher [[Permeability]] of the Silicon than free space.
	- $\epsi_0 \to \epsi_0\epsi_r$, with $\epsi_r \approx 10$ in most cases

With these divergences we now use the H-atom as a model of donors.

### Application

In a standard hydrogen atom the electron can occupy energy levels given by,

$$
\epsi_n^H = \frac{me^4}{2(4\pu\epsi_0)^2\hbar^2} \frac1{n^2} = \frac{13.6\unit{eV}}{n^2}
$$

where $13.6\unit{eV}$ is the ionisation energy of the electron. It also gives a [[Bohr Radius]], ie the expectation value of the 1s state,

$$
a_0^H = \frac{(4\pi\epsi_0)\hbar^2}{me^2} = 0.529\unit\angstrom
$$

Computing these quantities in the donor model we get,

$$
\epsi_n^H = \frac{m_e^*e^4}{2(4\pu\epsi_0\epsi_r)^2\hbar^2} \frac1{n^2} = \frac{1}{\epsi_r^2}\(\frac{m_e^*}{m}\) \frac{13.6\unit{eV}}{n^2} 
$$

and

$$
a_0^D = \frac{(4\pi\epsi_0\epsi_r)\hbar^2}{m_e^*e^2} = \epsi_r \frac{m}{m_e^*} 0.529\unit\angstrom
$$



