https://uniofbath.cloud.panopto.eu/Panopto/Pages/Viewer.aspx?id=771ac89e-c468-4636-8cef-ad05009178c2

## Atomic Potentials

Real solids are made up of atoms held together by interatomic forces, normally modeled using a [[Lennard-Jones Potential]]. The exact coefficients will differ depending on the solid in question, what bonding is dominant, etc.

However since we are dealing with solids, we will only 

- Real solids are made up of atoms held together by iteratomic forces
	- This is a R-J curve potential maybe? 6-12 or 1-10
	- This will differ from solid to solid however dependent on the bonding type.
	- However since we are dealing with solids we will only be dealing with regions surrounding the minima.
	- Hence we $\mathcal{O}((r - r_s)^2)$ it where $r_s$ is the minimum point.
		- Remembering the $r^1$ term is zero, and $r^0$ can be ignored in some cases.
		- $V(r) = V_0 + \frac 12 K(r - r_s)^2$
		- $F(r) = -\frac{\d V}{\d r} = -k(r - r_s)$
		- SPRINGSSSSSSS
		- Harmonic oscillation and all that good shit
		- > the subject of physics is the progression application of the harmonic oscillator to more and more basic components.


---

## Lattice Vibrations


- Lattice vibrations, Monatomic
	- Periodic array of atoms, parameter $a$.
	- Connected with springs with spring constnat $K$.
	- Displacent of atom is $u_s$ towards atom $s+1$
	- Knock on effects
	- Also extension of the $s-1 \to s$ spring.
	- All atoms move sym
	- EoM
		- Two forces from displacemtn of spring in left and rigth
		- Differential equation *and* recurrance relation, this sounds fun :D
		- However.... since we know about the continum limit we choose a wave like solution
			- $u_s = u\expp{i(kx_s - \omega t)}$
			- Again with the $\Re$eeeeeeee's
	- This gives a Dispersion relation ^3198d0
		- As a consequence of this we end up with a maximum omega [[#^cut-off]]
		- also its periodic in $\vk$ [[#^rok]]
		- Cut off Frequency ^cut-off
			- WHat happens if we try to break this
			- Leads to solutions with complex $\vk$ leading to a thing which decays with distance
				- Okay this is gonna need some work...
		- Range of k ^rok
			- THIS IS TO DO WITH THAT SAMPLING THINGGGYGYGGYYYYYYY
				- Maybe,
			- [[Brillouin Zone]]
		- Speed	Of Sound
			- Should this be under [[#^3198d0]]
			- Group and phase
			- Approx linear in small $\sin x \approx x$.
				- Long $\lambda$
			- What happens at the edges... it goes to zero. Standing wave!!!
	- Counting Lattice vibrations
		- periodic $s \to s + N$
	- Transverse 
		- All of the above was Longitudinal
		- Now trasverse
		- These are degenerate, with some in $x\ or\ y$,
		- Fun cuves
		- $3N$ vibrational modes
	- Application to IRL
		- Planes are like the model we used
		- Icky to plot
		- FCC
			- 