# Motivation for Fourier Series from Heat Equation

To motivate our detailed study of [[Fourier series]], starting in the next chapter, we introduce informally how these series arise naturally as a consequence of the search for solutions to the above partial differential equations.

As an example, consider the 1D [[Heat Equation]] with *fixed temperature boundary conditions* at the end of the interval $0 \leq x \leq L$ and a specified initial temperature distribution $f(x)$:

$$
\begin{align*}
\frac{\p u}{\p t} &= \kappa \frac{\p^2 u}{\p x^2}, \tag{Heat Equation} \\\\
u(0, t) & = u(L, t) = 0, \tag{Bounary Conditions} \\\\
u(x, 0) & = f(x). \tag{Initial Conditions}
\end{align*}
$$

^eq-10-19

## General Solution

Assume that the solution can be written in a ‘separated’ form

$$
u(x,t) = X(x)G(t)
$$

^eq-10-22

and substitute this into the PDE, to give

$$
X\frac{\p G} {\p t} = \kappa \frac{\p^2 X} {\p x^2},
$$

which can be re-arranged to form

$$
\frac{G'(t)}{\kappa G(t)} = \frac {X''(x)}{X(x)}.
$$

^eq-10-23

The key observation here is to note that the LHS is a function purely of $t$ and the RHS one of $x$, hence for them to be equal $\Forall x,t$, they must be constant. Thus choosing this constant to be $- \lambda^2 < 0$, we obtain,

$$
\begin{gather}
T(t) = \frac{G'(t)}{\kappa G(t)} = - \lambda^2 \\
\chi(x) = \frac {X''(x)}{X(x)} = - \lambda^2
\end{gather}
$$

> Alternatively, consider changing $x$ while keeping $t$ fixed. If the two sides above were not constant, then necessarily the left hand side, which only depends on time, would have to change as well.

Solving now the two (linear constant coefficient ordinary differential) equations for $G$ and $X$ yields[^2]

$$
\begin{align*}
X(x) &= A\cos (\lambda x) + B\sin (\lambda x), \\
G(t) &= D \e ^{-\kappa \lambda ^2 t}.
\end{align*}
$$

^eq-10-25

[^2]: The differential equation for $G(t)$ is a first-order linear equation that can be solved through separation. The differential equation for $X(x)$ is a second-order constant-coefficient equation that can be solved by substitution of $X(x) = \e ^{rx}$ and solving for $r$ to find the two linearly independent solutions. Review your Methods 1A notes on ODEs for a refresher.

## Boundary Conditions

It remains to apply the two boundary conditions,

$$
\begin{align}
u(0, t) &= 0 \\
u(L, t) &= 0
\end{align}
$$

which implies (on the assumption that $G(t) \ne 0 \,\Forall t$),

$$
\begin{align}
X(0) &= 0 \\
X(L) &= 0.
\end{align}
$$

^eq-10-27

When applied to the form given to $X$ from above,

$$
X(x) = A\cos (\lambda x) + B\sin (\lambda x),
$$

this enforces $A = 0$ by the first condition, with the second giving us, 

$$
B\sin (\lambda L) = 0 \implies \lambda = \frac {\pi n}{L}, \quad n \in \N.
$$

^eq-10-29

The case $n = 0$ only gives the zero solution, and choosing negative integers for $n$ simply leads to the same solutions but changes the sign of the constant $B$ (if $n$ is odd) or gives the same solution if $n$ is even. 

But each different value $n$ leads to a different possible solution. In general we can consider adding together all the possible components in order to get a general for solutions:

$$
u(x, t) = \sum_{n \in \N} B_n \exp({-\kappa \lambda_n ^2 t}) \sin (\lambda_n x),
$$
^eq-10-30

where $\lambda_n = \pi n/L$ and the coefficients $B_n$ are yet to be determined.

If the constant $-\lambda ^2$ is taken instead to be positive, i.e. $+\lambda ^2$, then we find that no solutions are possible since we would require

$$
X(x) = A\cosh(\lambda x) + B\sinh(\lambda x),
$$

and the boundary conditions at $x=0$ and $x=L$ then imply $X(0)=X(L)=0$ which means

$$
\begin{align*}
A \cosh(0) + B \sinh(0) = 0 & \quad \implies A=0, \quad \text {and then} \\
\phantom {A \cosh(L) +} B \sinh(L) =0 & \quad \implies B=0.
\end{align*}
$$

So no solutions of this kind can be found.

## Initial Conditions

Finally, we are left with the question of how to impose the initial condition (10.22). If we substitute $t = 0$ into (10.31), we find


$$
f(x) = \sum_{n=1}^\infty B_n \sin \left (\frac {\pi n x}{L}\right ),
$$

^eq-10-35

which implies that we need to solve this equation for the unknown values $B_n$. Infinite sums of sine (or cosine) terms like this are known as a [[Fourier Series]]; if we can determine the coefficients $B_n$ then we will have a solution to the original PDE problem specified by (10.20) - (10.22).
