
## Example 16

Suppose that we:

- Toss a fair coin
- Roll a fair die
- Pick a card randomly from a full well-shuffled deck of cards.

What is the probability we toss a head, score a 5 or 6, and pick a red face card?

We can apply the [[2.2 Multiplication Principle]] to compute both the [[1.2 Sample Space|Sample Space]] and the particular [[1.1 Event|Event]] of interest as,

$$
\begin{align*}
\Omega &=
\set{H, T}  \\
&\quad \cp \set{1, \dots, 6} \\
&\quad \cp \set{(s, c) : 
	s \in \set{♠️, ♥️, ♣️, ♦️},
	c \in \set{A, 2,  \dots, J, Q, K}
}
\end{align*}
$$

and,

$$
E = \set{H} \cp \set{5, 6} \cp \set{(s, c) : 
	s \in \set{♥️, ♦️},
	c \in \set{J, Q, K}
}
$$

respectively. By [[2.1 Equal a Priori Probabilities]] this gives us,

$$
\
$$



---
---

Suppose that we toss a fair coin, roll a fair die and pick a
card at random from a full pack of cards. What is the probability that
we toss a head and score a $5$ or a $6$ on the die and pick a red
picture[2](#fn2x2) card?

Let
$\Omega=\set{ (t, d, c) : t \in \set{ H, T }, d \in \set{ 1, … ⁡, 6 }, c \in \set{ A ♡ ⁡, … ⁡, K ♣ ⁡ } }$
then

$$
\begin{align}
|\Omega| = |\set{ H, T }|\times|\set{ 1, … ⁡, 6 }|\times|\set{ A ♡ ⁡, … ⁡, K ♣ ⁡ }| &  \\ = 2\times 6\times 52=624. & 
\end{align}
$$

Thus, there are 624 equally likely outcomes as the coin and the die are
fair and the card is picked at random. Let $E$ be the event that we toss
a head and score a $5$ or a $6$ on the die and pick a red picture card.
Then

$$
\begin{align}
E = \set{ (t, d, c) : t in \set{ H }, d in \set{ 5, 6 }, c in \set{ J ♡ ⁡, Q ♡ ⁡, K ♡ ⁡, J ♢ ⁡, Q ♢ ⁡, K ♢ ⁡ } } & 
\end{align}
$$

so that

$$
\begin{align}
|E| = |\set{ H }|\times|\set{ 5, 6 }|\times|\set{ J ♡ ⁡, Q ♡ ⁡, K ♡ ⁡, J ♢ ⁡, Q ♢ ⁡, K ♢ ⁡ }| &  \\ = 1\times 2\times 6=12. & 
\end{align}
$$

Thus, $E$ can occur in 12 different ways. Using the classical
interpretation of probability, equation
([2.1](nose3.htm#x12-19005r2.1)), we have that

$$
\begin{align}
\P(E)=\frac{| E |}{| \Omega |}=\frac{1 2}{6 2 4}=\frac{1}{5 2}. & & & 
\end{align}
$$
