# Ordered choice: permutations

A permutation is an ordered arrangement of objects. Suppose that
$E=\set{ e_1, … ⁡, e_n }$ is a set and we wish to choose
$r$ elements from $E$ and list them \in order. How many ways can we do
this?

The answer depends upon whether or not elements can be chosen more than
once. If we are allowed to duplicate elements from $E$ then we are
Sampling with replacement whilst if duplication is not permitted we are
Sampling without replacement.

## Sampling with replacement

Corollary 7 (Ordered choice: Sampling with replacement)
The number of ways of choog $r$ elements from a set of $n$ elements,
with replacement, where the order \in which they are drawn matters, is
$n^{r}$.

Proof: Follows immediately from Theorem [6](nose4.htm#x13-200026), the
multiplication pciple, with $m=r$ and $n_i=n$ for each $i=1,…⁡,r$.
$square$

Example 17 A fair die is rolled four times. You w\in if at least one of
the rolls scores a $6$ otherwise you lose. What is the probability that
you lose?

We can tk of each roll as bg the selection of an element from the
set $\set{ 1, 2, … ⁡, 6 }$ and duplication is allowed so it
is as if we are Sampling with replacement from
$\set{ 1, 2, … ⁡, 6 }$. If $s_i$ denotes the score on the
$i$th roll then the sample space is

$$
\begin{align}
\Omega = \set{ (s_1, s_2, s_3, s_4) : s_1, s_2, s_3, s_4 \in \set{ 1, 2, … ⁡, 6 } }=(\set{ 1, 2, … ⁡, 6 })^{4} 
\end{align}
$$

(so, for example, the sample pt $(1, 5, 3, 5)$
corresponds to an outcome of $1$ on the first roll, $5$ on the second
roll, $3$ on the third roll, and $5$ on the last roll). Ug Corollary
[7](#x14-220017), $|\Omega|=6^{4}$. Let
$E=\set{ \text{you lose} }=\set{ \text{you don’t roll a 6} }$
then the number of ways of $E$ occurg can be thought of as the number
of ways of choog $4$ elements from the set
$\set{ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 }$ when duplication is allowed,

$$
\begin{align}
E = \set{ (s_1, s_2, s_3, s_4) : s_1, s_2, s_3, s_4 \in \set{ 1, 2, … ⁡, 5 } }=(\set{ 1, 2, … ⁡, 5 })^{4} & 
\end{align}
$$

Thus, $|E|=5^{4}$. As the die is fair then all outcomes are
equally likely and so,

$$
\begin{align}
\P(E) = \frac{| E |}{| \Omega |}=\frac{5^{4}}{6^{4}}=\frac{6 2 5}{1 2 9 6}. & 
\end{align}
$$

## Sampling without replacement

We now consider the number of ways of choog $r$ different elements \in
order from a set of $n$ elements. Thus, once an item has been chosen, it
is not replaced and so the number of reming elements decrease. There
are $n$ ways to choose the first item. Hag not replaced this item,
there are then $n-1$ ways to choose the second item and so on so that
once $(r - 1)$ have been chosen (and not replaced), there
are then $n-(r - 1)$ ways to choose the $r$th item. Ug
the multiplication pciple, Theorem [6](nose4.htm#x13-200026), we thus
have
$n\times(n - 1)\times\dots \times(n - (r - 1))$
ways of choog the $r$ elements \in order. For any non-negative \integer
$m$, dee $m$-factorial, written $m!$, by

$$
\begin{align}
m! = \set{\begin{matrix} \begin{matrix}m(m - 1)(m - 2)\dots 3\times 2\times 1 & \text{if}m=1,2,3,…⁡; \\ 1 & \text{if}m=0.\end{matrix} \end{matrix}\right. \}& 
\end{align}
$$

Putg this together, we have the follog corollary.

Corollary 8 (Ordered choice: Sampling without replacement,
permutations)
The number of permutations of length $r$ taken from a set of size $n$,
or equivalently, the number of ways of choog $r$ different elements
\in order from a set of $n$ elements is

$$
\begin{align}
n(n - 1)(n - 2)\dots (n - (r - 1)) = \frac{n (n - 1) \dots  (n - (r - 1)) (n - r) (n - (r + 1)) \dots  1}{(n - r) (n - (r + 1) \dots  1} &  \\ = \frac{n !}{(n - r) !}. & 
\end{align}
$$

Example 18 Five cards from a shuffled pack are dealt face up \in a row.
What is the probability that they are all picture cards?

Let $\Omega$ be the set of ordered sequences of five cards drawn at
random without replacement. Then

$$
\begin{align}
|\Omega| = 52\times 51\times 50\times 49\times 48. & 
\end{align}
$$

Let $E$ be the event that you get a sequence only conting picture
cards. As there are a total of 12 picture cards (four suits, three
picture cards \in each suit) then

$$
\begin{align}
|E| = 12\times 11\times 10\times 9\times 8 & 
\end{align}
$$

As all sequences of cards are equally likely,

$$
\begin{align}
\P(E) = \frac{| E |}{| \Omega |}=\frac{1 2 \times 1 1 \times 1 0 \times 9 \times 8}{5 2 \times 5 1 \times 5 0 \times 4 9 \times 4 8}=0.0003(\text{4dp}). & 
\end{align}
$$

Corollary 9 (Number of permutations of $n$ objects)
The number of permutations of $n$ objects, equivalently, the number of
ways $n$ elements can be arranged \in order is $n!$.

Proof: From Corollary [8](#x14-230028) with $r=n$ gives $n!/0!=n!$.
$square$

Example 19

(a)

How many disct permutations of the word "METHODS" are there?

There are seven disct letters so there are $7!=5040$ permutations.

(b)

How many disct permutations of the word "ALGEBRA" are there?

Notice that there are two "A"s. If we label the $A$s as $A_1$, $A_2$
then there are $7!$ permutations of the letters $A_1$LGEBR$A_2$ when
we disguish the $A$s. Consider any one of these permutations, say
$A_1A_2$LGEBR. This is equivalent to $A_2A_1$LGEBR: there are
$2!$ ways of permug the $A$s whilst keeg the reming five
letters fixed. Thus, there are $7!/2!=2520$ disct permutations.

We can generalise Example [19](#x14-2300919)(b) \into the follog
theorem which we'll revisit with Theorem [8](nose6.htm#x15-260048) \in
Section [2.4.2](nose6.htm#x15-260002).

Theorem 7 (Number of disguishable permutations)
The number of disguishable permutations of $n$ objects of $k$
different types where there are $n_1$ of identical type $1$, $n_2$
of identical type $2$, $…⁡$, $n_k$ of identical type $k$, where
$n_1+n_2+dots +n_k=n$ is

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{n !}{n_1 ! n_2 ! \dots  n_k !}. & & & \text{(2.2)}
\end{align}
$$
