### 2.4 Unordered choice: comations

A comation is an unordered arrangement of objects. Suppose that we
have a set $E=\set{ e_1, … ⁡, e_n }$ of $n$ disct
elements and wish to choose $r$ elements from $E$ so that the
arrangement of the elements is irrelevant. How many ways can we do this?

Example 20 An ice-cream shop offers three flavours of ice-cream: vanilla
(V), strawberry (S) and lemon (L). You are allowed to choose two scoops.
How many different ways can you choose these?

The order of the scoops does not matter. There are two cases:

1.  

You are not allowed to pick the same flavour twice (Sampling without
replacement).
From Corollary [8](nose5.htm#x14-230028) there are
$3!/(3 - 2)!=6$ permutations: $(V, S)$,
$(S, V)$, $(V, L)$, $(L, V)$,
$(S, L)$, $(L, S)$ but as the order of the
scoops don't matter then each option appears twice and thus there are
only $\frac{3 !}{(3 - 2) ! 2 !}=3$ comations:
$(V, S)$ $(= (S, V))$,
$(V, L)$ $(= (L, V))$,
$(S, L)$ $(= (L, S))$.

2.  

You are allowed to pick the same flavour twice (Sampling with
replacement).
From Corollary [7](nose5.htm#x14-220017) there are $3^{2}=9$
permutations: $(V, S)$, $(S, V)$,
$(V, L)$, $(L, V)$, $(S, L)$,
$(L, S)$, $(V, V)$, $(S, S)$,
$(L, L)$ but as the order of the scoops don't matter there
are only six comations: $(V, S)$
$(= (S, V))$, $(V, L)$
$(= (L, V))$, $(S, L)$
$(= (L, S))$, $(V, V)$,
$(S, S)$, $(L, L)$. Note that \in discoung
the order, we treat differently the choices with no repetition (which,
\in this case, can be ordered two ways) to those with repetition (which,
\in this case, can only be ordered one way).

As Example [20](#x15-2400120) suggests, it will be easier to consider
the number of comations which correspond to Sampling without
replacement.

#### 2.4.1 Sampling without replacement

We consider the number of ways of choog $r$ different elements from a
set of $n$ elements where order does not matter.

From Corollary [8](nose5.htm#x14-230028), the number of ordered samples
(or permutations) is $n!/(n - r)!$. The number of times
that we have counted each choice, when we do not take account of order,
is the number of disct ways of arrang $r$ different objects. From
Corollary [9](nose5.htm#x14-230089), there are $r!$ ways of dg this.
Therefore, for each of the $n!/(n - r)!$ different
permutations there are $r!$ permutations which conta\in the same
elements. Thus, when order does not matter, there are
$n!/\set{ (n - r) ! r ! }$ disct comations.
We thus have the follog corollary.

Corollary 10 (Unordered choice: Sampling without replacement,
comations)
The number of comations of length $r$ taken from a set of size $n$,
or equivalently, the number of ways of choog $r$ different elements
from a set of $n$ elements where order does not matter is

$$
\begin{align}
(\frac{n}{r}) & := & \frac{n !}{r ! (n - r) !}. & \text{(2.3)}
\end{align}
$$

Notes

1.  

$(\frac{n}{r})$ is read as "$n$ choose $r$".

2.  

The numbers $(\frac{n}{r})$ are called the omial
coefficients and occur \in the expansion[3](#fn3x2)

$$
\begin{align}
((x + y))^{n} = \sum_{r = 0}^{n}(\frac{n}{r})x^{r}y^{n - r} &  \\ = (\frac{n}{0})y^{n}+(\frac{n}{1})xy^{n - 1}+\dots +(\frac{n}{n - 1})x^{n - 1}y+(\frac{n}{n})x^{n}. & 
\end{align}
$$

3.  

From equation ([2.3](#x15-25002r2.3)), it's immediate that for
$r=0,1,…⁡,n$

$$
\begin{align}
(\frac{n}{r}) = (\frac{n}{n - r}). & 
\end{align}
$$

Example 21 Suppose that we capture $6$ fish from a lake conting $10$
fish \in total, tag them and return them to the lake. Later, we return
and catch $3$ fish from the lake. What's the probability that exactly
$r$ of them are tagged?

Let $\Omega=\set{\text{all subsets of size \(3\) from \(10\) fish}}$
then

$$
\begin{align}
|\Omega|=(\frac{1 0}{3})=\frac{1 0 !}{3 ! 7 !}=\frac{1 0 \cdot 9 \cdot 8}{3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1}=120. & & & 
\end{align}
$$

Let $E_r = \set{\'{subsets of size \(3\) of \(10\) fish with exactly \(r\) marked fish}}$ then, for each
$r \in \set{ 0, 1, 2, 3 }$,

$$
\begin{align}
|E_r|
= (\text{\# subsets of size }r\text{ from }6\text{ marked fish}) &  \\ & & \times(\text{\# subsets of size }(3 - r)\text{ from }4\text{ unmarked fish}) &  \\ = (\frac{6}{r})\times(\frac{4}{3 - r}).
\end{align}
$$

As all fish are assumed equally likely to be caught, then each sample
pt of $\Omega$ is equally likely so that, for each
$r\in\set{ 0, 1, 2, 3 }$,

$$
\begin{align}
\P(E_r) = \frac{| E_r |}{| \Omega |}=\frac{(\frac{6}{r}) (\frac{4}{3 - r})}{1 2 0}
\end{align}
$$

Thus, for example,

$$
\begin{align}



\P(\set{\text{none tagged}}) = \P(E_0)=\frac{1}{1 2 0}(\frac{6}{0})(\frac{4}{3})=\frac{1}{3 0} &  \\ & & &  \\ \P(\set{ \text{exactly 2 tagged}}) = \P(E_2)=\frac{1}{1 2 0}(\frac{6}{2})(\frac{4}{1})=\frac{1}{1 2 0}\frac{6 \cdot 5 \cdot 4}{2 \cdot 1}=\frac{1}{2}.
\end{align}
$$

Example 22 Five cards are dealt from a shuffled pack of 52 cards. What's
the probability of getg a full house, that is, three of one number
and a pair of another number?

We first d the number of different hands of five cards. Let
$\Omega=\set{$subsets of $5$ cards$}$ then
$|\Omega|=(\frac{5 2}{5})$ .

We now count how many possible ways there are of obting a full house.
There are 13 ways of choog the number of the card that is \in the
triple and, hag done so, there are $(\frac{4}{3})$ ways of
choog the three suits. As there are only four cards of each number
then there are 12 ways of choog the number of the card that is \in the
pair and $(\frac{4}{2})$ ways of choog the suits. If we
let $E=\set{$get a full house$}$ then

$$
\begin{align}
|E| = 13\times(\frac{4}{3})\times 12\times(\frac{4}{2}) & 
\end{align}
$$

As all hands are equally likely,

$$
\begin{align}
\P(E)=\frac{| E |}{| \Omega |} = \frac{1 3 \times 1 2 \times (\frac{4}{3}) \times (\frac{4}{2})}{(\frac{5 2}{5})} &  \\ = 13\cdot 12\cdot 4\cdot\frac{4 \cdot 3}{2 \cdot 1}\frac{5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1}{5 2 \cdot 5 1 \cdot 5 0 \cdot 4 9 \cdot 4 8} &  \\ & & &  \\ = \frac{6}{4 1 6 5}=0.0014\text{(4 d.p)}. & 
\end{align}
$$

#### 2.4.2 Mulomial coefficients

When choog $r$ objects from $n$ disct objects, we can equivalently
tk of the number of ways $n$ objects can be placed \into two subsets
with $r$ objects \in one subset and $n-r$ objects \in the other. We can
extend this to $k$ subsets where we place $n_i$ objects \into the $i$th
subset.

-   there are $(\frac{n}{n_1})$ ways of choog the first
    subset, leag $n-n_1$ objects;
-   there are $(\frac{n - n_1}{n_2})$ ways of choog
    the second subset, leag $n-n_1-n_2$ objects; $$
    beg\in{align}
    \vdots⁡\vdots⁡\vdots⁡\vdots⁡\vdots⁡ & & & 
    end{align}
    $$
-   there are
    $(\frac{n - n_1 - \dots - n_{k - 2}}{n_{k - 1}})$ ways
    of choog the $(k - 1)$th subset, leag
    $n-n_1-dots -n_{k - 1}=n_k$ objects;
-   there are $(\frac{n - n_1 - \dots - n_{k - 1}}{n_k})$
    ways of choog the $k$th subset, leag no objects reming.

Nog that

$$
\begin{align}
(\frac{n}{m})(\frac{n - m}{q})=\frac{n !}{m ! (n - m) !}\frac{(n - m) !}{q ! (n - m - q) !}=\frac{n !}{m ! q ! (n - m - q) !} & & & 
\end{align}
$$

we may show that

$$
\begin{align}
(\frac{n}{n_1})(\frac{n - n_1}{n_2})\times\dots \times(\frac{n - n_1 - \dots  - n_{k - 1}}{n_k}) = \frac{n !}{n_1 ! n_2 ! \dots  n_k !} & 
\end{align}
$$

so that we obta\in the follog theorem.

Theorem 8 (Divig $n$ objects \into $k$ subsets)
The number of ways a set of $n$ objects can be divided \into $k$ subsets
of sizes $n_1,n_2,…⁡,n_k$ where $n_1+n_2+dots +n_k=n$ is

$$
\begin{align}
(\frac{n}{n_1, n_2, … ⁡, n_k}) & := & \frac{n !}{n_1 ! n_2 ! \dots  n_k !}. & \text{(2.4)}
\end{align}
$$

Notes

1.  

For $k=2$ we recover Corollary [10](#x15-2500110): take $n_1=r$ so
that $n_2=n-n_1=n-r$.

2.  

The numbers $(\frac{n}{n_1, n_2, … ⁡, n_k})$ are
called the mulomial coefficients and occur \in the expansion

$$
\begin{align}
((x_1 + x_2 + \dots  + x_k))^{n} = \sum(\frac{n}{n_1, n_2, \dots , n_k})x_1^{n_1}x_2^{n_2}\dots x_k^{n_k} & 
\end{align}
$$

where the sum is over all non-negative \integers $n_1,n_2,…⁡,n_k$
such that $n_1+n_2+dots +n_k=n$.

3.  

Notice that equation ([2.4](#x15-26005r2.4)) \in Theorem [8](#x15-260048)
is identical to equation ([2.2](nose5.htm#x14-23011r2.2)) \in Theorem
[7](nose5.htm#x14-230107) when we considered the number of
disguishable permutations of $n$ objects of $k$ different types where
there are $n_1$ of the first type, $…⁡$, $n_k$ of the $k$th type,
where $n_1+n_2+dots +n_k=n$.

Example 23 A pack of cards is dealt between $N,E,S$ and $W$. What's the
probability $N$ and $S$ each get $2$ aces?

Let $\Omega=\set{$partitions of $52$ cards \into 4 hands of $13$
cards$}$ so

$$
\begin{align}
|\Omega|=(\frac{5 2}{1 3, 1 3, 1 3, 1 3})=\frac{5 2 !}{1 3 ! 1 3 ! 1 3 ! 1 3 !}=\frac{5 2 !}{((1 3 !))^{4}}. & & & 
\end{align}
$$

Let $E=\set{$partitions of $52$ cards \into $4$ hands of $13$ with $2$
aces for $N$and $S}$ then

$$
\begin{align}
|E| = (\text{\# ways choog }2\text{ of }4\text{ aces for }N) &  \\ & & \times(\text{\# ways divig }48\text{ non aces \into }11,13,11,13) &  \\ = (\frac{4}{2})\times(\frac{4 8}{1 1, 1 3, 1 1, 1 3})=\frac{4 !}{2 ! 2 !}\times\frac{4 8 !}{1 1 ! 1 3 ! 1 1 ! 1 3 !}. & 
\end{align}
$$

As all partitions of $52$ cards are equally likely,

$$
\begin{align}
\P(E) = \frac{(\frac{4}{2}) (\frac{4 8}{1 1, 1 3, 1 1, 1 3})}{(\frac{5 2}{1 3, 1 3, 1 3, 1 3})} &  \\ = \frac{4 !}{2 ! 2 !}\frac{4 8 !}{((1 1 !))^{2} ((1 3 !))^{2}}\frac{((1 3 !))^{4}}{5 2 !}=\frac{4 6 8}{2 0 8 2 5}=0.0225(\text{4dp}). & 
\end{align}
$$

#### 2.4.3 Sampling with replacement

We now consider how to choose $r$ elements from a set
$E=\set{ e_1, e_2, … ⁡, e_n }$ of $n$ elements, with
replacement, when the order \in which they are drawn does not matter. Any
such sample consists of $m_1$ picks of $e_1$, $m_2$ picks of
$e_2$, $…⁡$, $m_n$ picks of $e_n$ where each $m_i$ is a
non-negative \integer and $m_1+dots +m_n=r$.

We can represent this sample by consideg $r$ red balls laid out \in a
row from left-to-right. Starg at the left most ball and mog to the
right we do the follog:

-   after $m_1$ red balls, \insert a black ball \into the row of balls
-   after the next $m_2$ red balls, \insert a black ball \into the row
    of balls $$
    beg\in{align}
    \vdots⁡\vdots⁡\vdots⁡\vdots⁡\vdots⁡ & & & 
    end{align}
    $$
-   after pasg through $m_1+…⁡+m_{n - 2}$ red balls and hag
    \inserted $n-2$ black balls, after the next $m_{n - 1}$ red balls,
    \insert a black ball \into the row of balls
-   to the right of this black ball are $m_n$ red balls

This procedure gives us $r$ red balls and $n-1$ black balls, a total of
$n-1+r$ balls. The number of samples is thus the number of
disguishable permutations of $n-1+r$ objects of $2$ different types
where there are $r$ of the first type (the red balls) and $n-1$ of the
second type (the black balls). From Theorem [7](nose5.htm#x14-230107) we
have the follog corollary.

Corollary 11 (Unordered choice: Sampling with replacement)
The number of ways of choog $r$ elements from a set of $n$ elements,
with replacement, where the order \in which they are drawn does not
matter is

$$
\begin{align}
(\frac{n - 1 + r}{r}) = \frac{(n - 1 + r) !}{r ! (n - 1) !}. & 
\end{align}
$$

Example 24 Recall the ice-cream example of Example [20](#x15-2400120).
If we can choose any of the three flavours twice, \inclug duplication,
then there are

$$
\begin{align}
(\frac{3 - 1 + 2}{2})=(\frac{4}{2})=\frac{4 !}{2 ! 2 !}=6 & & & 
\end{align}
$$

possible selections.

[3](#fn3x2-bk)Tag $x=y=1$ gives that
$(\sum ⁡)_{r = 0}^{n}(\frac{n}{r})=2^{n}$ and
provides a proof as to the number of elements \in the power set of a set
of size $n$ bg $2^{n}$ as we sum over the number of subsets with $0$
elements, $1$ element, $…⁡$, $n$ elements.

\
\
