## 1.4 [Equivalence Relations](MA10209-web.html#QQ2-5-8)

As for functions, a relation $\sim$ on a set $A$ (such as $\leq$ of $ℝ$ ) can be characterised by its graph, that is, $\left\{ \left( a , b \right) \in A \times A : a \sim b \right\}$. In other words, two relations on the same set $A$ are equal if and only if their graphs are equal (as subsets of $A \times A$ ).

## Definition 1.32.  
  
Let $\sim$ be a relation on a set $A$ .

(R)

$\sim$ is **reflexive** iff $\forall a \in A : a \sim a$ .

(S)

$\sim$ is **symmetric** iff $\forall a , b \in A : a \sim b \Rightarrow b \sim a$ .

(T)

$\sim$ is **transitive** iff $\forall a , b , c \in A : a \sim b \text{ and } b \sim c \Rightarrow a \sim c$ .

When (R), (S) and (T) all hold, we call $\sim$ an **equivalence relation**.

## Example 1.33.  
  

(a)

On any set, $=$ is an equivalence relation.

(b)

The relation $\leq$ on $ℝ$ is reflexive and transitive, but **not** symmetric. The relation $<$ on $ℝ$ is just transitive.

(c)

On $P \left( A \right) \backslash\left\{ ∅ \right\}$ define $\sim$ to be ’overlaps’, that is, $X \sim Y$ iff $X \cap Y \neq ∅$ . This is reflexive and symmetric, but not transitive.

(d)

The relation $\cong$ on $P \left( A \right)$ for any set $A$ (see Section [1.3](#x5-70001.3)).

(e)

Let $f : A \rightarrow B$ be any function. Define $\sim$ on $A$ by $x \sim y$ iff $f \left( x \right) = f \left( y \right)$ .

(R) $f \left( x \right) = f \left( x \right)$ , (S) $f \left( x \right) = f \left( y \right) \Rightarrow f \left( y \right) = f \left( x \right)$ ,

(T) $f \left( x \right) = f \left( y \right)$ and $f \left( y \right) = f \left( z \right) \Rightarrow f \left( x \right) = f \left( z \right)$ .

Think of $\sim$ as ’ $=$ ’ pulled back from $B$ .

## Definition 1.34.  
  
A **partition** of a set $A$ is a subset $Q \subseteq P \left( A \right) \backslash \left\{ ∅ \right\}$, i.e. a collection of non-empty subsets of $A$ , such that for all $a \in A$ , there is a unique $X \in Q$ such that $a \in X$ (in other words, the subsets are disjoint and their union is $A$ .)

Writing $q \left( a \right)$ for the unique $X \in Q$ containing $a$ gives a function $q : A \rightarrow Q : a \rightarrow tail q \left( a \right)$ such that $a \in q \left( a \right)$ .

For example, if $A = \left\{ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 \right\}$, then $Q = \left\{ \left\{ 1 , 3 , 5 \right\} , \left\{ 2 , 4 \right\} \right\}$ is a partition of $A$ , but $Q = \left\{ \left\{ 1 , 2 \right\} , \left\{ 3 , 4 \right\} \right\}$ is not, nor is $Q = \left\{ \left\{ 1 , 2 \right\} , \left\{ 2 , 3 \right\} , \left\{ 3 , 4 \right\} , \left\{ 4 , 5 \right\} \right\}$.

## Lemma 1.35.  
  
If $Q$ is a partition of $A$ , then it determines an equivalence relation by

$$
a \sim b \Leftrightarrow q \left( a \right) = q \left( b \right) .
$$

Proof. See Example [1.33](#x5-8002r33) (e). □

## Definition 1.36.  
  
Let $\sim$ be an equivalence relation on $A$ . For each $a \in A$ define the **equivalence classes**

$$
\left[ a \right] = \left\{ x \in A : x \sim a \right\} .
$$

## Lemma 1.37.  
  
In this situation, $a \sim b$ if and only if $\left[ a \right] = \left[ b \right]$ .

Proof. ( $\Leftarrow$ ) $a \in \left[ a \right]$ since $a \sim a$ (R), so

$$
\left[ a \right] = \left[ b \right] \Rightarrow a \in \left[ b \right] \Rightarrow a \sim b .
$$

( $\Rightarrow$ ) Now want to show

$$
a \sim b \Rightarrow \left( x \in \left[ a \right] \Leftrightarrow x \in \left[ b \right] \text{i.e.} x \sim a \Leftrightarrow x \sim b \right) ,
$$

Now, if $a \sim b$ and $x \sim a$ , then $x \sim b$ by (T). On the other hand, if $a \sim b$ and $x \sim b$ , then $b \sim a$ by (S) and so $x \sim a$ by (T). □

For example, the relation $\leq$ does not have this property, that is, $a \leq b$ is not equivalent to $\left\{ x \in ℝ : x \leq a \right\} = \left\{ x \in ℝ : x \leq b \right\}$, which is actually equivalent to $a = b$ .

## Proposition 1.38.  
  
The collection of equivalence class for an equivalence relation

$$
Q = \left\{ \left[ a \right] \in P \left( A \right) : a \in A \right\}
$$

is a partition of $A$ .

Proof. For all $a \in A$ , we have $a \in \left[ a \right]$ by (R), so each $\left[ a \right] \in Q$ is non-empty and each $a \in A$ is in some $X \in Q$ .

For uniqueness (so that equivalence classes are disjoint or equal), suppose that $a \in \left[ b \right]$ for some other $b \in A$ . But this means that $a \sim b$ and so $\left[ a \right] = \left[ b \right]$ by Lemma [1.37](#x5-8006r37). Thus $\left[ a \right]$ is the only equivalence class containing $a$ and so the equivalence classes form a partition. □

Remark.  
  
Combining Lemmas [1.35](#x5-8004r35) and [1.37](#x5-8006r37), we see that, if $Q$ is a partition of $A$ , then the equivalence relation it determines (i.e. $a \sim b$ iff $q \left( a \right) = q \left( b \right)$ ) has equivalence classes $\left[ a \right] = q \left( a \right)$ . Likewise, the partition determined by an equivalence relation has $q \left( a \right) = \left[ a \right]$ and so its associated equivalence relation is the one we started with.

Thus the two processes described in this section are mutually inverse and show that a partitions of, or an equivalence relation on, a set are logically equivalent information.

## Example 1.39.  
  
For any set $A$ , there is an equivalence relation on $P \left( A \right)$ given by $\cong$ as in Def. [1.26](#x5-7004r26). Equivalence classes classes consist of sets of the same size. Conceptually, $\cong$ is an equivalence relation on sets, but not formally, because there is no set of all sets.

## Example 1.40.  
  
Let $f : A \rightarrow A$ be a bijection from a finite set $A$ to itself (also called a ‘permutation’ of $A$ ). We can then define $f^{n} : A \rightarrow A$ , for any $n \in ℤ$ , by

$$
f^{n} = \begin{cases}
\underset{\text{}n\text{ times}}{\underbrace{f \circ \dots  \circ f}} & n>0
\\

\left(Id\right)_{A} & n=0 \\

\underset{\text{}-n\text{ times}}{\underbrace{f^{- 1} \circ \dots  \circ f^{- 1}}} & n<0
\end{cases}
$$

One can check the power laws $f^{n} \circ f^{m} = f^{n + m}$ and $\left(\left( f^{n} \right)\right)^{m} = f^{n m}$ , for all $n , m \in ℤ$ .

Consider the relation on $A$ given by $a \sim b$ iff $a = f^{n} \left( b \right)$ for some $n \in ℤ$ . We can check this is an equivalence relation:

$$
\begin{align}
\left( R \right) & a=f^{0}\left( a \right),\left( S \right)a=f^{n}\left( b \right)\Rightarrow b=f^{- n}\left( a \right), & & \\ \left( T \right) & a=f^{n}\left( b \right)\text{and}b=f^{m}\left( c \right)\Rightarrow a=f^{n + m}\left( c \right). & & 
\end{align}
$$

The equivalence classes are called ‘orbits’ of $f$ and these are finite, as $A$ is finite. This helps give a \simple picture of the action of $f$ , because it must ‘cycle’ the elements in each orbit, that is,

$$
f : a_{1} \rightarrow tail a_{2} \rightarrow tail \dots  \rightarrow tail a_{n} \rightarrow tail a_{1}
$$

Note that the cycle must return to the beginning, because $f$ is injective and every other element in it has a predecessor. i.e. $a_{k} = f \left( a_{k - 1} \right)$ unless $k = 1$ .