# Cardinality and Counting

We start with a fundamental fact, that may seem obvious. We will not give a proof, but will investigate more closely what it actually means.

## Proposition 1.23 (Pigeonhole Principle).  
  
Let $A , B$ be finite sets. If there is an injection $f : A \rightarrow B$ , then $\left|A\right| \leq \left|B\right|$ . Alternatively, if $\left|A\right| > \left|B\right|$ , then there is no injection $A \rightarrow B$ .

In more concrete terms, if you want to put some balls ( $A$ ) in some boxes ( $B$ ) and you have more balls than boxes, then some box will end up with more than one ball in it.

## Corollary 1.24.  
  
If $A , B$ are finite sets and there is a bijection $f : A \rightarrow B$ , then $\left|A\right| = \left|B\right|$ .

Proof. Apply the PHP (Prop. [1.23](#x5-7001r23)) to both $f$ and $f^{- 1}$ , which are both injective, to deduce that $\left|A\right| \leq \left|B\right|$ and $\left|B\right| \leq \left|A\right|$ , so $\left|A\right| = \left|B\right|$ . □

Is the converse to Corollary [1.24](#x5-7002r24) true? To think about this and how we might prove the PHP, we must first ask: how is $\left|A\right|$ actually defined? The answer begins like this.

## Definition 1.25.  
  
A set $A$ is **finite** if there is a bijection $c : \left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\} \rightarrow A$ , which ’counts’ it, for some $n \in ℕ_{0}$ . We include the case $n = 0$ , by decreeing that $\left\{ 1 , \dots  , 0 \right\} = ∅$ .

Informally, $A$ is finite if we can write it as $A = \left\{ a_{1} , \dots  , a_{n} \right\}$, without repeats. We would like to then say that $\left|A\right| = n$ , but should worry whether a finite set $A$ could satisfy this for two different values of $n$ . We start by thinking more about bijections.

## Definition 1.26.  
  
Two sets $A , B$ are **equinumerous** (i.e. have the same size) if there is a bijection $f : A \rightarrow B$ . If so, we write $A \cong B$ .

Observe that

*   $A \cong A$ because $\left(Id\right)_{A} : A \rightarrow A$ is a bijection.
*   if $A \cong B$ , then $B \cong A$ because if $f : A \rightarrow B$ is a bijection, then $f^{- 1} : B \rightarrow A$ is also a bijection (Theorem [1.20](#x5-6012r20) (c)).
*   if $A \cong B$ and $B \cong C$ , then $A \cong C$ , because the composite of two bijections is also a bijection (Prop. [1.19](#x5-6011r19) (c)).

All these properties are clearly necessary for using the term “same size”. We can now say that $A$ is finite if and only if $A \cong \left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\}$, for some $n \in ℕ_{0}$ . But, if $A \cong \left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\}$ and $A \cong \left\{ 1 , \dots  , m \right\}$, then these properties mean that $\left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\} \cong \left\{ 1 , \dots  , m \right\}$, so we see that the size $\left|A\right|$ of a finite set $A$ is well-defined, provided we can prove the following.

## Proposition 1.27.  
  
If there is an injection $\left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\} \rightarrow \left\{ 1 , \dots  , m \right\}$, then $n\leq m$ .

Just as for with Cor. [1.24](#x5-7002r24), we can then immediately deduce what we need.

## Corollary 1.28.  
  
If there is a bijection $\left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\} \rightarrow \left\{ 1 , \dots  , m \right\}$, then $n=m$ .

Note that Prop. [1.27](#x5-7005r27) looks like a special case of the PHP (Prop. [1.23](#x5-7001r23)), but is in fact it what you need to prove it. Indeed, combining an injection $A \rightarrow B$ with counting bijections gives (by Prop [1.19](#x5-6011r19)(a)) an injection

$$
\left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\} \rightarrow A \rightarrow B \rightarrow \left\{ 1 , \dots  , m \right\}
$$

to which Prop. [1.27](#x5-7005r27) applies and gives $\left|A\right| = n \leq m = \left|B\right|$ .

We will not prove Prop. [1.27](#x5-7005r27), but it can be proved by induction on $m$ . The base case $m = 0$ rests on the fact that there is no map at all $A \rightarrow ∅$ when $A \neq ∅$ .

= Lecture 8 =

## Proposition 1.29.  
  
Let $A$ be a finite set.

*   If $X \subseteq A$ , then $X$ is finite and $\left|X\right| \leq \left|A\right|$ .
*   If $f : Y \rightarrow A$ is an injection, then $Y$ is finite and $\left|Y\right| \leq \left|A\right|$ .
*   If $g : A \rightarrow Z$ is a surjection, then $Z$ is finite and $\left|Z\right| \leq \left|A\right|$ .

Proof. **(a)** The key is to prove that $X$ is finite, then we can apply PHP to the inclusion map $X \rightarrow A$ to get the final inequality. Informally, if we can write $A = \left\{ a_{1} , \dots  , a_{m} \right\}$ in some order, then we can use the same order to write $X = \left\{ x_{1} , \dots  , x_{n} \right\}$ and so count  $X$ .

**(b)** Since $f : Y \rightarrow A$ is injective, the induced map $\overset{̃}{f} : Y \rightarrow im \left( f \right)$ is also injective and is surjective by construction, so is a bijection, that is $Y \cong im \left( f \right)$ . But $im \left( f \right) \subseteq A$ so $im \left( f \right)$ is finite, that is, $im \left( f \right) \cong \left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\}$ for some $n \in ℕ_{0}$ by (a). Hence $Y \cong \left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\}$, that is, $Y$ is finite. The final inequality follows again from PHP.

**(c)** Since $g : A \rightarrow Z$ is surjective, it has a right inverse $h : Z \rightarrow A$ (Thm. [1.20](#x5-6012r20)(b)) and $h$ is injective because $g$ is a left inverse (Thm. [1.20](#x5-6012r20)(a)). Hence we can apply (b) to $h$ and get the result. □

Observe that Def. [1.26](#x5-7004r26) applies to arbitrary sets not just finite ones and we can wonder whether all infinite sets are equinumerous. In fact, they are not. In particular, there is never a bijection between $A$ and $P \left( A \right)$ (see Ex. 3.9). On the other hand, we have the following.

## Proposition 1.30.  
  
A set $A$ is infinite (i.e. not finite) if and only if there is an injection $f : ℤ^{+} \rightarrow A$ .

Proof. Suppose first there is an injection $f : ℤ^{+} \rightarrow A$ and a bijection $c : \left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\} \rightarrow A$ . Then, by Prop. [1.19](#x5-6011r19) (a), the composite $c^{- 1} \circ f \circ inc : \left\{ 1 , \dots  , m \right\} \rightarrow \left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\}$ will be injective, for any $m \in ℤ^{+}$ , contradicting PHP (Prop.[1.27](#x5-7005r27)). Thus, if there is such an injection $f$ , then $A$ must be infinite.

Conversely, if $A$ is infinite, then we can build an injection $f : ℤ^{+} \rightarrow A$ recursively. That is, we can build injections $f_{n} : \left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\} \rightarrow A$ , for all $n \in ℤ^{+}$ , such that, for all $m \leq n$ , the restriction of $f_{n}$ to $\left\{ 1 , \dots  , m \right\}$ is $f_{m}$ . We start with $f_{0} : ∅ \rightarrow A$ , which is always an injection. Given an injection $f_{n - 1}$ , we can make $f_{n}$ by choosing some $a \in A \backslash im \left( f_{n - 1} \right)$ and setting $f_{n} \left( n \right) = a$ . This will only fail if $f_{n - 1}$ is surjective, and hence a bijection, so that $A$ is finite. Thus, if $A$ is infinite, then this recursive construction works. □

## Definition 1.31.  
  
Let $A$ be a set.

*   $A$ is **countably infinite** if there is a bijection $f : ℤ^{+} \rightarrow A$ .
*   $A$ is **countable** if $A$ is finite or countably infinite.

We will not study this in any detail, but note a few facts that are good to know. Some of these will be revisited in Analysis 1.

*   $ℤ$ is countably infinite,
*   $ℤ \times ℤ$ and $ℚ$ are countably infinite,
*   $P \left( ℤ \right)$ and $ℝ$ are uncountably infinite (i.e. infinite but not countably so).

More generally

*   if $A$ is countable and there is a surjection $A \rightarrow B$ or an injection $B \rightarrow A$ , then $B$ is countable. In particular, any subset of a countable set is countable.
*   $A$ is countable if and only if there is an injection $f : A \rightarrow ℤ^{+}$ .
*   if $A$ and $B$ are countable, then so is $A \cup B$ and $A \times B$ .
