ALGEBRA 2B (MA20217): MAIN NOTATION

Below is a list of the main notation of the course, in the order in which it occurs.

$R$ is usually a ring: other common names for rings are $S$ and $A$, but we may use whatever we like.

$R^*$ or $R^\times$ is often the names for the set of units in $R$. These form a group under multiplication.

Fields are often called $F$, $\FF$ or $K$ (sometimes $k$ or $\KK$): if we need more fields, the obvious thing to do is to call them $L$ and $M$.

$M_n(R)$ (sometimes $M_{n\times n}(R)$) is the ring of $n\times n$ matrices with entries in $R$. It is not commutative, even if $R$ is, unless $n=1$ when it is just a copy of $R$.

$R[\![t]\!]$ is the ring of formal power series with coefficients in $R$

$R[t]$ is the ring of polynomials in one variable over $R$.

$\ev _a\colon R[t]\to R$ is the map that sends $p(t)$ to $p(a)$, where $a\in R$.

Ideals are usually called $I$: if we need another one, we could call it $J$.

The principal ideal generated by $a$ is denoted $aR$ (or $Ra$, which is the same thing as we only talk about principal ideals in a commutative ring), or, if we are sure we know what ring we are working it, we can call it $\langle a\rangle$. The latter is convenient if the ring has a complicated name.

The quotient ring of $R$ by an ideal $I$ is denoted $R/I$ — be careful which way the slash goes (think of it as looking like a fraction).

The kernel of $\varphi \colon R\to S$ is denoted $\Ker \varphi$. The image is denoted $\Im \varphi$ but you could also call it $\varphi (R)$.

The characteristic of a ring $R$ is denoted $\Char R$ – in practice we are most likely to mention it if $R=K$ is a field.

The direct product is written $R\times S$.

The field of fractions of an integral domain $R$ is called ${\cQ }(R)$. This is my personal notation, not a general standard, but you may use it without explaining it.

The field of rational functions over field $K$ is denoted $K(t)$.

$a|b$ means $a$ divides $b$ (we are in an integral domain here), so $b=ac$ for some $c$. It is a Boolean-valued statement: $a|b$ is either true or false. It is not the name of an element of a ring.

If an element of an integral domain is called $p$ that’s often a sign that it is, or is going to turn out to be, prime or at least irreducible. But it might be $p$ for polynomial.

$\nu$ is usually a (Euclidean) valuation.

$\HH$ denotes the quaternions, with square roots of $-1$ called $i$, $j$ and $k$: they have $ij=k=-ji$.

$K[t_1,\ldots ,t_n]$ is the ring of polynomials in $n$ variable with coefficients in $K$.

A field extension is denoted $L:K$. You just have to remember which way round this goes: the one on the left, before the colon, is the big field.

$\|w\|$ is the norm of a quaternion.

In general, $\|\cdot \|$ means a norm.

$\End (V)$ is the set of endomorphisms of a (usually finite-dimensional) $K$-vector space. It is a $K$-algebra.

$\eta _{\bde }$ is the isomorphism from $M_n(K)$ to $\End (V)$ that sends a matrix $A$ to the map “represent your vector in terms of $\bde$ and then multiply it by $A$”.

$\ev _\alpha$ substutes $\alpha$ for $t$ in an element of $K[t]$

$\II _n$ is the $n\times n$ identity matrix.

$m_\alpha$ is the minimum polynomial of $\alpha \in \End (V)$, similarly $m_A$

$\chi _\alpha$ is the characteristic polynomial of $\alpha$.

$\am (\lambda )$ is the algebraic multiplicity of an eigenvalue $\lambda$.

$\gm (\lambda )$ is the geometric multiplicity of an eigenvalue $\lambda$.

$E_\alpha (\lambda )$, the space of eigenvectors of $\alpha$ with eigenvalue $\lambda$.

$\alpha |_W$ is the restriction of $\alpha \in \End (V)$ to an invariant subspace $W$ (so $\alpha |_W\in \End (W)$).

$\oplus$ means direct sum, either of maps or of vector spaces.

$J(\lambda ,e)$, a Jordan block.

$Z_\alpha (v)$, the cyclic subspace for $\alpha$ generated by $v$.

$G_\alpha (\lambda )$, the generalised eigenspace.

$\JNF (\alpha )$, the Jordan Normal Form.