MA10207 – Analysis 1 (Semester 2)
=================================

### Chapter 1 Limits and continuity of functions

#### 1.1 Limits of functions

Here we deﬁne precisely the notion of the limit of a function and study its properties. Suppose that $f\colon \R \to \R$ and $c\in \R$. The idea is that the statement “the limit of $f(x)$ is equal to $L$ as $x$ tends to $c$”, where $L$ is a real number, means that the diﬀerence $f(x) - L$ can be made arbitrarily small provided that $x$ is suﬃciently close to $c$, but not equal to $c$. We write this as $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x)=L$.

###### Example 1.1

. 

Let $f\colon (-\frac {\pi }{2},0)\cup (0,\frac {\pi }{2})\to \R$ be deﬁned by $f(x) = \frac {\tan (x)}{x}$. Using a calculator we get that



$$
 \being{align*} f[[#^eq-0-1]] &\approx 1.00334672085 \\ f[[#^eq-0-01]] & \approx 1.00003333467 \\ f[[#^eq-0-001]] & \approx 1.00000033333 . \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-1-0
 This suggest that $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to 0} f(x) = 1$.

In the deﬁnition of the limit $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x)$ we assume that $f(x)$ is deﬁned near $c$ except possibly at $c$. More precisely we make the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 1.2. 

We say that $A \subset \R$ is a punctured neighborhood of $c\in \R$ if there exists $\delta >0$ such that


$$
 (c-\delta ,c) \cup ( c,c+\delta ) \subset A. 
$$

Deﬁnition 1.3. 

Let $f\colon D \to \R$ and $c \in \R$, so that $D$ is a punctured neighbourhood of $c$, and let $L \in \R$. We say that


$$
 \lim _{x\to c} f(x) = L 
$$

if for any $\varepsilon > 0$ there exists $\delta > 0$ such that


$$
 \forall x\in D, \quad 0 < |x-c| < \delta \Longrightarrow \ |f(x) - L| < \varepsilon . 
$$

###### Remark 1.4

. 

• Deﬁnition 1.3 is the so-called $\varepsilon$-$\delta$ deﬁnition of the limit of a function. Later, in Theorem 1.7, we give an alternative characterisation in terms of sequences.

• If $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x) = L$ we say that $L$ is the limit of $f(x)$ as $x$ tends to $c$. If it exists, the limit is unique, which is proved below.

• For $x \in \R$ the condition $0 < |x-c| < \delta$ is equivalent to $x \in (c-\delta ,c) \cup ( c,c+\delta )$.

Indeed,



$$
 \being{align*} 0 <|x-c|<\delta & \Longleftrightarrow -\delta <x-c<0 \quad \mbox { or }\quad 0<x-c<\delta \\ & \Longleftrightarrow c-\delta <x<c \quad \mbox { or } \quad c<x<c+\delta \\ & \Longleftrightarrow x\in (c-\delta ,\,c) \cup (c,\,c+\delta )=(c-\delta ,\,c+\delta )\setminus \{c\}. \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-1-0


In particular $0 < |x-c| < \delta$ implies that $x\not =c$.

• Using the standard notation $\forall$, $\exists$ we can write $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c}f(x)=L$ as



$$
 \being{align} \label {def-limit} & \forall \varepsilon >0 \quad \exists \delta >0 \quad \forall x \in D, \quad 0 < |x-c| < \delta \ \Longrightarrow \ |f(x) - L| < \varepsilon . \end{align} 
$$
^eq-1-0
 In [[#^eq-1-1]] $\varepsilon$ is speciﬁed ﬁrst, and $\delta$ typically depends on $\varepsilon$.

• In Deﬁnition 1.3 we are requiring that $D$ is a punctured neighbourhood of $c$. This is not strictly necessary, and for all results below it suﬃces to assume that



$$
 \being{align} \label {non-isolated} \forall \delta >0 \quad [(c-\delta ,c)\cup (c,c+\delta ) ] \cap D \not =\emptyset . \end{align} 
$$
^eq-1-1
 If [[#^eq-1-2]] does not hold, it is not possible to ﬁnd points in $D \setminus \{c\}$ that are arbitrarily close to $c$, and it would not make sense to deﬁne $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x)$.

The idea in the deﬁnition of $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x)$ is depicted in In Figure 1.1. The vertical blue lines are at $x = c-\delta$ and $x= c+\delta$. The horizontal red lines are at $y = L-\varepsilon$ and $y= L+\varepsilon$. For $x$ in $(c-\delta ,c)\cup (c,c+\delta )$ the value $f(x)$ is between the red horizontal lines. $f(c)$ does not need to be evaluated and does not need to be deﬁned. If $f(c)$ is deﬁned its value is not important in the deﬁnition of $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x)$.

Figure 1.1: Limit $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x)$. For any $x \in (c-\delta ,c)\cup (c,c+\delta )$, that is in between the vertical blue lines and avoiding $c$, $f(x)$ is between the horizontal red lines.

Here is the result that justiﬁes the uniqueness of the limit.

Lemma 1.5 (Uniqueness of limits). 

Let $f\colon D \to \R$, $c\in \R$ with $D$ a punctured neighbourhood of $c$. Suppose that $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x) = L_1$ and $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x) = L_2$ for some $L_1,L_2\in \R$. Then $L_1 = L_2$.

Proof. Suppose that $L_1>L_2$. Let $\varepsilon = \frac {L_1-L_2}{2}>0$. Then by deﬁnition there exists $\delta _1>0$ such that


$$
 \forall x\in D, \quad 0 < |x-c| < \delta _1 \ \Longrightarrow \ |f(x) - L_1| < \varepsilon , 
$$

and there exists $\delta _2>0$ such that


$$
 \forall x\in D, \quad 0 < |x-c| < \delta _2 \ \Longrightarrow \ |f(x) - L_2| < \varepsilon . 
$$

On the other hand, since $D$ is a punctured neighbourhood of $c$, there exists $\delta >0$ such that $(c-\delta ,c)\cup (c,c+\delta ) \subset D$.

Observe then that $\{ x\in \R \, | \, 0<|x-c|<\min ( \delta , \delta _1,\delta _2)\} \not =\emptyset$ and is contained in $D$. Choosing any $x$ such that $0<|x-c|<\min ( \delta , \delta _1,\delta _2)$ we see that


$$
 L_1 - \varepsilon <f(x) < L_2 +\varepsilon , 
$$

which implies $L_1<L_2 + 2 \varepsilon = L_1$. This is a contradiction.  □

###### Example 1.6

. 

For each of the following $f\colon \R \to \R$, $c$ and $L$, show that $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c}f(x)=L$.

1. $f(x)=1$ for all $x \in \R$; $c=0, L=1$.

2. $c = 0$, $L =1$,


$$
 f(x) = \left \{ \begin {aligned} & 1, \quad x \in \R \setminus \{0\} , \\ & 0, \quad x = 0. \end {aligned} \right . 
$$

3. $f(x)=x$ for all $x \in \R$; any $c\in \R$ and $L = c$.

4. $c=L=1$,


$$
 f(x) = \left \{ \begin {aligned} & \frac {1}{x}, \quad x \in \R \setminus \{0\},\\ & 0 , \quad x=0. \end {aligned} \right . 
$$

###### Solution

. 

Below, we use a method of solution in which, given $\varepsilon >0$, we suppose that $0<|x-c|<\delta$, for some $\delta >0$ to be chosen later. As we proceed, we place various upper bounds on $\delta$. We ﬁrst assume that $\delta$ is small enough to ensure that $x$ is in a subdomain such that $f(x)$ is well-deﬁned. Next, we attempt to show that $|f(x)-L|\leq K_0|x-c|$, where $K_0$ is allowed to depend on any of the upper bounds for $\delta$, but not should not be a function of $|x-c|$. It is also easier if $K_0$ does not depend explicitly on $\delta$ itself. Finally, we conclude that Deﬁnition 1.3 holds, provided that $\delta$ does not exceed any of its upper bounds assumed in the course of the calculation, and $\delta \leq \varepsilon /K_0$. (Alternative solution methods exist. The value of $\delta$ obtained is not unique.)

1. Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given. (Here, $\varepsilon >0$ is ﬁxed from this point in the argument.) Since for any $x\in \R$


$$
 |f(x) -1 | = |1-1| = 0 , 
$$

we may take any $\delta >0$. Then for $x$ such that $0<|x-0|<\delta$, we have


$$
 |f(x)-1|=|1-1|=0<\varepsilon . 
$$

Hence, Deﬁnition 1.3 is satisﬁed with any choice of $\delta >0$.

2. This has the same solution as part 1.

3. Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given. Let $\delta >0$ to be chosen later. For $0<|x-c|<\delta$ we have


$$
 |f(x)-c| = |x-c|<\delta . 
$$

The choice $\delta :=\varepsilon$ now ensures that Deﬁnition 1.3 is satisﬁed, that is, $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c}f(x)=c$.

4. Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given. Suppose that $0<|x-1|<\delta$, for some $\delta >0$ to be chosen later. If $\delta \leq 1$,


$$
 1-x=-(x-1)\leq |x-1|<\delta \leq 1\Longrightarrow x>0 
$$

and thus $f(x) = \frac {1}{x}$. Hence, for $0<|x-1|<\delta$


$$
 |f(x)-1|=|1/x-1|=\left |\frac {1-x}{x}\right |=\frac {1}{|x|} |x-1|. 
$$

Assuming also that $\delta \leq 1/2$, we get


$$
 1-x=-(x-1)\leq |x-1|<\delta \leq 1/2 \Longrightarrow 1/2\leq x \Longrightarrow 0< \frac {1}{x}<2 \Longrightarrow \frac {1}{|x|}<2. 
$$

Substituting this bound for $1/|x|$ above, we deduce that


$$
 |f(x)-1|= \frac {1}{|x|} |x-1|\leq 2|x-1|. 
$$

Finally, if $\delta =\min ( 1/2,\,\varepsilon /2)$, then


$$
 |x-1|<\delta \Longrightarrow |f(x)-1|\leq 2|x-1|<2\delta \leq \varepsilon . 
$$

We have shown that Deﬁnition 1.3 is satisﬁed. Thus, $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to 1}f(x)=1$.

Theorem 1.7 (Sequential characterisation of the limit). 

Let $f\colon D\to \R$ and $c, L \in \R$. Suppose that $D$ is a punctured neighbourhood of $c$. Then, the following statements are equivalent:

(a) $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c}f(x) = L$.

(b) For any sequence $(x_n)_{n=1}^\infty \subseteq D \setminus \{c\}$ such that $\lim _{n\to \infty }x_n=c$ we have


$$
 \lim _{n\to \infty }f(x_n)=L. 
$$

Proof.

We prove (a) $\Longrightarrow$ (b)

By Deﬁnition 1.3, given $\varepsilon > 0$, there exists $\delta >0$ such that


$$
 \forall x \in D, \quad 0<|x-c|<\delta \ \Longrightarrow \ |f(x)-L|<\varepsilon . 
$$

Let $(x_n)_{n=1}^\infty \subseteq D \setminus c$ satisfy $\displaystyle \lim _{n \to \infty } x_n = c$. Then, there exists $N \in \N$ such that, for all $n \geq N$,


$$
 0< |x_n-c|<\delta . 
$$

Hence, for all $n \geq N$,


$$
 |f(x_n)-L|<\varepsilon . 
$$

We conclude that $\displaystyle \lim _{n \to \infty } f(x_n) = L$.

We prove (b) $\Longrightarrow$ (a). Suppose that (b) is true, but (a) is false. The negation of (a) is the negation of [[#^eq-1-1]], that is, there exists $\varepsilon >0$ such that for all $\delta >0$, there exists $x_\delta \in D$ such that $0<|c-x_\delta |<\delta$ and



$$
 \being{align} \label {11} |f(x_\delta )-L| \geq \varepsilon . \end{align} 
$$
^eq-1-2
 We consider only $\delta _n=1/n$, for $n\in \N$. Then $x_{\delta _n} \in D$,


$$
 0<|c-x_{\delta _n}|<\delta _n \quad \text {and}\quad |f(x_{\delta _n})-L| \geq \varepsilon . 
$$

Let us write $x_n = x_{\delta _n}$. Since $0<|x_n-c|<\frac {1}{n}$ we see that $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } x_n = c$. By (b) we get that $\lim _{n\to \infty }f(x_n) = L$. Therefore there exists $N\in \N$, such that for $n\geq N$ $|f(x_n)-L| < \varepsilon$. But this contradicts [[#^eq-1-3]] and this ﬁnishes the proof.  □

Theorem 1.7 shows that statement (b) may be used as an alternative deﬁnition to Deﬁnition 1.3. The sequential characterisation of the limit allows us to extend several results on limits of sequences to limits of functions.

Lemma 1.8 (Inertia). 

Let $f\colon D\to \R$ where $D\subset \R$, and let $c, L, M \in \R$. Suppose that $D$ contains a punctured neighbourhood of $c$ and that $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c}f(x)=L>M$. Then there exists $\delta >0$ such that


$$
 \forall x \in D, \quad 0<|x-c|<\delta \ \Longrightarrow \ f(x)>M. 
$$

Proof. Let $\varepsilon := L-M$, which is positive. Applying Deﬁnition 1.3, there exists $\delta > 0$ such that


$$
 \forall x \in D, \quad 0<|x-c|<\delta \ \Longrightarrow \ |f(x)-L|<\varepsilon . 
$$

Hence, $-(f(x) - L) \leq |f(x) - L| < \varepsilon = L-M$. Subtracting $L$ and rearranging, we obtain


$$
 \forall x \in D, \quad 0<|x-c|<\delta \Longrightarrow f(x)>M. 
$$

 □

###### Remark

. 

We recall that for sequences we have a similar result. Let $(x_n)_{n\in \N }$ be a real sequence and assume that $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } x_n = L$ and $L>M$. Then there exists $n_0\in \N$ such that


$$
 x_n > M \quad \text {for all }n\geq n_0. 
$$

To prove this, let $\varepsilon = L - M>0$. By deﬁnition of $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } x_n = c$ there is $n_0\in \N$ such that


$$
 |x_n-L|<\varepsilon \quad \text {for all }n\geq n_0. 
$$

But $|x_n-L|<\varepsilon$ implies that $x_n>L-\varepsilon = M$. So


$$
 x_n > M \quad \text {for all }n\geq n_0. 
$$

The following result is a partial converse to Lemma 1.8.

Lemma 1.9. 

Let $f\colon D\to \R$, let $c, L, M \in \R$, and let $d>0$. Suppose that $D$ is a punctured neighbourhood of $c$, $(c,c+d) \subset D$, $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c}f(x)=L$, and that



$$
 \label {ast4} \forall x \in D, \quad 0<x-c<d \Longrightarrow f(x)\leq M. 
$$
^eq-1-3


Then, $L\leq M$.

Proof. Suppose otherwise; i.e. $L>M$. Then, the conditions of Lemma 1.8 are satisﬁed and there exists $\delta >0$ such that



$$
 \being{eqnarray*} \forall x \in D, \quad 0<|x-c|<\delta \ &\Longrightarrow &\ f(x) >M. \end{eqnarray*} 
$$
^eq-1-4


In particular, if $0<x-c<\min (\delta ,d)$ we have $f(x)>M$ and also $f(x) \leq M$ by [[#^eq-1-4]]. This is a contradiction and we deduce $L\leq M$.  □

Theorem 1.10 (Algebra of limits). 

Let $f,g:D\to \R$ and let $c, \alpha , L_f, L_g \in \R$, with $D \subset \R$ punctured neighbourhood of $c$. Suppose that


$$
 \lim _{x\to c}f(x)= L_f \quad \text {and}\quad \lim _{x\to c}g(x) = L_g. 
$$

Then

1. $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} (f+g)(x)= L_f+L_g$.

2. $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} ( \alpha f(x) ) = \alpha L_f$.

3. $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} (fg)(x) = L_f L_g$.

4. If $L_g\neq 0$ then $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c}\left (\dfrac {f}{g}\right )(x)= \frac {L_f}{L_g}$.

Proof. We restate the hypotheses on $f$ and $g$ using the sequential characterisation of the limit, given in statement (b) of Theorem 1.7. Let $(x_n)_{n=1}^{\infty }\subset \R \setminus \{c\}$ satisfy $x_n\to c$ as $n\to \infty$. Then, $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty }f(x_n)=L_f$ and $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty }g(x_n)=L_g$. By the algebra of limits for sequences, we obtain


$$
 \lim _{n\to \infty } f(x_n) + g(x_n) = L_f + L_g, 
$$

and similar sequential versions of statements 2–4. These are equivalent to the $\varepsilon$-$\delta$ versions of statements 1–4, by Theorem 1.7.  □

Corollary 1.11. 

Let $c \in \R$, and let $p,q: \R \to \R$ be polynomials. Then,

1. $\displaystyle \lim _{x \to c}x=c.$

2. For all $k\in \N \cup \{0\}$, $\displaystyle \lim _{x \to c}x^k=c^k.$

3. $\displaystyle \lim _{x \to c} p(x) = p(c)$.

4. If $q(c) \neq 0$, then $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} \dfrac {p}{q}(x) = \dfrac {p}{q}(c)$.

Proof.

1. This is Example 1.6 part 3.

2. This is proved by induction, using part 1 and Theorem 1.10.

3. Given a real polynomial $p$, there exists $m\in \N _0$ and $\{a_k\}_{k=0}^{m}\subset \R$ such that $p(x)={\displaystyle \sum _{k=0}^{m}a_k x^k}$. Then, by 2 and Theorem 1.10, parts 1 and 2,



$$
 \being{align*} \lim _{x\to c}p(x) &=\lim _{x\to c}\sum _{k=0}^{m}a_k x^{k}=\sum _{k=0}^{m}\lim _{x\to c}(a_k x^{k})=\sum _{k=0}^{m}a_k\lim _{x\to c} x^{k} \\ & =\sum _{k=0}^{m}a_kc^k=p(c). \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-1-4


4. This now follows from 3 and Theorem 1.10 part 4.

 □

###### Example 1.12

. 

Show that the function $f:\R \to \R$


$$
 f(x) := \left \{ \begin {aligned} \sin \Big (\frac {1}{x}\Big ), & \quad x \in \R \setminus \{0\},\\ 0, &\quad x = 0, \end {aligned}\right . 
$$

has no limit as $x$ tends to $0$.

###### Solution

. 

Consider the sequence deﬁned by


$$
 x_{n}= \frac {1}{(n+\frac {1}{2})\pi }, \quad n \in \N , 
$$

which satisﬁes $x_n\to 0$ as $n\to \infty$ and $x_n\not =0$. We see that


$$
 f(x_n) = \sin ((n+\frac {1}{2})\pi ) = (-1)^n . 
$$

This sequence is not convergent, and by the sequential characterisation of the limit, Theorem 1.7, $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to 0} f(x)$ does not exist.

Exercise. 

Show that the following function has no limit as $x$ tends to $0$:


$$
 f(x) := \left \{ \begin {aligned} 1, & \quad x \in \Q \\ 0, & \quad x \in \R \setminus \Q . \end {aligned} \right . 
$$