# 3.6 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus

In earlier sections, we have developed the intuitive idea of “area under the curve” into a rigorous definition of an integral for bounded functions. Here, we show how the Riemann integral is connected with the notion of derivative.

## Theorem 329 (First Fundamental Theorem of Calculus).

Let $a<b$ and let $F\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be continuous on $[a,b]$ and differentiable on $(a,b)$. Let $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be integrable such that $f(x) = F’(x)$ for $x\in (a,b)$. Then

$$
\int _a^b f = F(b) - F(a).
$$

### Proof

Let $\varepsilon >0$ and $P$ be a subdivision of $[a,b]$ be such that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{23}%%

$$
\begin{align} \label {estAA} U(f,P) - L(f,P) < \varepsilon . \end{align}
$$

Write $P = \{x_0,\ldots ,x_1\}$ with $x_0 = a < x_1 \ldots < x_n=b$. Then

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{24}%%

$$
\begin{align*} F(b) - F(a) = \sum _{j=1}^n ( F(x_j) - F(x_{j-1}) ) . \end{align*}
$$

By the mean value theorem, Theorem 2.22 there exists $c_j \in (x_{j-1},x_j)$ such that

$$
F(x_j) - F(x_{j-1}) = F’(c_j) (x_j-x_{j-1}),
$$

and then

$$
F(b) - F(a) = \sum _{j=1}^n f’(c_j) (x_j-x_{j-1}) .
$$

This formula and (3.24) show that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{24}%%

L(f, P ) ≤ f ≤ U (f, P ) ≤ L(f, P ) + ε

$$
\begin{align*} L(f,P)\leq F(b) - F(a) \leq U(f,P) \leq L(f,P) + \varepsilon . a \end{align*}
$$

But b

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{24}%%

f = F (b) − F (a).

$$
\begin{align*} L(f,P)\leq \int _a^b f \leq U(f,P) \leq L(f,P) + \varepsilon a \end{align*}
$$

and hence

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{24}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \left | \int _a^b f - ( F(b) - F(a) ) \right |\leq \varepsilon . \end{align*}
$$

Since $\varepsilon >0$ is arbitrary we obtain

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{24}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \int _a^b f = F(b) - F(a) . \end{align*}
$$

□

The relationship between $f$ and $F$ in this theorem has its own terminology.

## Definition 330.

Let $a<b$ and let $F\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be continuous on $[a,b]$ and differentiable on $(a,b)$. Let $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be such that $f(x) = F’(x)$ for $x\in (a,b)$. Then we call $F$ a primitive of $f$.

The Second Fundamental Theorem says that we can use integration to find primitives for continuous functions.

## Theorem 331 (Second Fundamental Theorem of Calculus).

Suppose that $f \colon [a, b] \rightarrow \mathbb {R}$ is integrable and define $F \colon [a, b] \rightarrow \mathbb {R}$ by

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{24}%%

$$
\begin{align} \label {def:F} F(x) = \int _a^x f. \end{align}
$$

Then $F$ is continuous on $[a,b]$. If $f$ is continuous at $c \in (a, b)$, then $F$ is differentiable at $c$, and

$$
F’(c) = f(c).
$$

### Proof

Let $M\in \R$ be such that $|f(x)| \leq M$ for all $x\in [a,b]$. We claim that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{25}%%

$$
\begin{align} \label {F Lipschitz} |F(x)-F(y)|\leq M |x-y|, \quad \forall x,y \in [a,b]. \end{align}
$$

This implies continuity of $F$ at any point in $[a,b]$, as in Example 1.20. To prove (3.26), let $x,y\in [a,b]$ and assume that $x\leq y$. Then by (3.14),

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{26}%%

$$
\begin{align*} |F(x)-F(y) | & = \Bigr | \int _a^x f - \int _a^y f \Bigl | = \Bigr | \int _x^y f \Bigl | \leq \int _x^y |f| \end{align*}
$$

where in the last step we have used Theorem 3.28. By Theorem 3.27, using that $|f|\leq M$, we get

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{26}%%

$$
\begin{align*} |F(x)-F(y) | \leq \int _x^y M = M ( x-y). \end{align*}
$$

This proves (3.26).

Suppose that $f$ is continuous at $c\in (a,\,b)$. Let $\varepsilon >0$ be given. Let $\delta >0$ be such that $(c-\delta ,c+\delta ) \subset (a,b)$ and

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{26}%%

$$
\begin{align} \label {ineq-f} |f(x)-f(c)| < \varepsilon \quad \forall x \in (c-\delta ,c+\delta ). \end{align}
$$

For $0<h<\delta$ we have

$$
F(c + h) - F(c) = \int _a^{c + h} f - \int _a^c f = \int _c^{c + h} f
$$

by additivity (Theorem 3.23). Also, by Example 3.10 on the integration of constant functions,

$$
hf(c)=\int _{c}^{c+h} f(c)\,dx
$$

Subtracting these two expressions, and again using additivity,

$$
\frac {F(c + h) - F(c)}{h}-f(c)=\frac {1}{h}\int _{c}^{c+h}(f(x)-f(c))\,dx.
$$

By Theorem 3.28, for $0<h<\delta$ we have

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{27}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \Bigl | \frac {F(c + h) - F(c)}{h}-f(c) \Bigr | =& \Bigl | \frac {1}{h}\int _{c}^{c+h}(f(x)-f(c))\,dx \Bigr | \\ & \leq \frac {1}{h}\int _{c}^{c+h} |f(x)-f(c)|\,dx. \end{align*}
$$

But for $0<h<\delta$, combining (3.27) and Theorem 3.27 we find that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{27}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \Bigl | \frac {F(c + h) - F(c)}{h}-f(c) \Bigr | & \leq \frac {1}{h}\int _{c}^{c+h} \varepsilon \,dx = \varepsilon . \end{align*}
$$

A similar argument for $h\in (-\delta ,0)$ gives

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{27}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \Bigl | \frac {F(c + h) - F(c)}{h}-f(c) \Bigr | &= \Bigl | \frac {1}{h}\int _{c}^{c+h}(f(x)-f(c))\,dx \Bigr | \\ & \leq \frac {1}{|h|}\int _{c+h}^{c} |f(x)-f(c)|\,dx \\ & \leq \frac {1}{|h|}\int _{c+h}^{c} \varepsilon \,dx \\ &= \varepsilon . \end{align*}
$$

Therefore

$$
\lim _{h\rightarrow 0}\frac {F(c + h) - F(c)}{h}=f(c).
$$

□

The following example shows that $F$ defined by (3.25) may not be differentiable in general.

### Example 3.32

.

Let $f:[-1,1]\rightarrow \mathbb {R}$,

$$
f(x):=\left \{ \begin {aligned} & 0,& -1&\leq x<0, \\ & 1,& 0&\leq x\leq 1. \end {aligned} \right .
$$

By Proposition 3.16 $f$ is integrable in $[-1,1]$. Let $F$ be defined by (3.25)

$$
F(x)=\left \{ \begin {aligned} & 0, & -1&\leq x<0 ,\\ & x, & 0&\leq x\leq 1. \end {aligned} \right .
$$

We compute

$$
\lim _{h\rightarrow 0+}\frac {F(h)-F(0)}{h}=1\neq 0=\lim _{h\rightarrow 0-}\frac {F(h)-F(0)}{h} ,
$$

and deduce that $F’(0)$ does not exist. In general, the function $F$ defined in (3.25) is not differentiable, if $f$ is discontinuous at $c$.
