#### 3.7 Integration techniques

The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus allows us to use our knowledge of differentiation to help us evaluate integrals. This leads to two familiar techniques for integration.

Theorem 3.33 (Integration by parts).

Let $f, g \colon [a, b] \rightarrow \R$ be continuous. Suppose that $F, G \colon [a, b] \rightarrow \R$ are continuous functions on $[a,b]$, differentiable in $(a,b)$, such that $F’(x)= f(x)$ and $G’(x) = g(x)$ for $x\in (a,b)$. Then

$$
\int _a^b fG + \int _a^b Fg = F(b)G(b) - F(a)G(a).
$$

Proof. Write $H = FG$. Then $H:[a,b]$ is continuous on $[a,b]$ (by algebra of continuity, Theorem 1.23). By hypothesis, both $F$ and $G$ are differentiable on $(a, b)$, and by the product rule, Theorem 2.5(iii), $H$ is differentiable on $(a,b)$ and

$$
H’ = F’G+FG’=fG + Fg \quad \text {in }(a,b).
$$

As $f,\,g,\,F$ and $G$ are all continuous on $[a,b]$, so are $fG$ and $Fg$, and the latter functions and their sum are integrable. Thus, by the first Fundamental Theorem of Calculus (Theorem 3.29),

$$
\int _a^b fG + Fg = \int _{a}^{b} H’=H(b) - H(a) = F(b)G(b) - F(a)G(a).
$$

Finally, by linearity (Theorem 3.25), the left-hand side is

$$
\int _a^b fG + \int _a^b Fg.
$$

□

###### Remark

.

The more familiar way to write the formula

$$
\int _a^b fG = F(b)G(b) - F(a)G(a) - \int _a^b Fg.
$$

is

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{27}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \int _a^b u \, d v = u(b)v(b)-u(a)v(a) - \int _a^b v \, d u \end{align*}
$$

where $u(x) = G(x)$, $du = \frac {du}{dx} \,dx = f(x) \,dx$, $v(x) = G(x)$, $dv = \frac {dv}{dx} \,dx = g(x) \,dx$.

Theorem 3.34 (Integration by substitution).

Let $J\subset \R$ be an open interval and $u:J\to \R$ be continuously differentiable. Let $I \subset \R$ be a closed interval and $f:I \to \R$ be continuous on $I$. Assume that $u(x) \in I$ for all $x\in J$. Then for any $a,b\in J$,

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{27}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \int _{u(a)}^{u(b)} f = \int _a^b (f\circ u) u’. \end{align*}
$$

Proof.

We start by observing that $f$ is integrable $\int _{u(a)}^{u(b)} f$ is well defined, by Theorem 3.17 and where we use the notation in Definition 3.24.

Define $F\colon I\to \R$ by

$$
F(x) = \int _{u(a)}^x f, \quad x \in I.
$$

By the Second Fundamental Theorem of Calculus (Theorem 3.31), $F$ is continuous on $I$, differentiable in the interior of $I$ and $F’(x) = f(x)$ for $x$ in the interior of $I$.

Consider $F\circ u \colon J \to \R$. Then by the chain rule (Theorem 2.9), $F\circ u$ is differentiable in $J$ and

$$
(F\circ u)’(y) = F’(u(y)) u’(y) .
$$

Note that the function $y \in J \mapsto F’(u(y)) u’(y)$ is continuous on $J$. By the First Fundamental Theorem of Calculus (Theorem 3.29), for any $a,b\in J$

%%\seteqnumber{0}{3.}{27}%%

$$
\begin{align*} \int _a^b F’(u(y)) u’(y) \,dy &= F(u(b))-F(u(a)) \\ &=F(u(b)) \\ &= \int _{u(a)}^{u(b)} f. \end{align*}
$$

□
