MA10207 – Analysis 1 (Semester 2)
=================================

#### 1.4 Continuity of basic functions

Here we show that some basic functions are continuous. We recall that a polynomial $p$ is a function $p:\R \to \R$ of the form

$$ p(x) = \sum _{k=0}^na_kx^k , $$

where $n\in \N$, and $a_0,\ldots ,a_n\in \R$.

*   Corollary 1.27. 
    
    Polynomials are continuous in $\R$.
    

*   Proof.
    
    A monomial is a function of the form $m:\R \to \R$, $m(x) = x^n$ where $n\in \N$. All monomials are continuous at every point in $\R$ by induction (using Theorem 1.23) and continuity of the identity.
    
    Hence all polynomials are continuous in $\R$ as they are linear combinations of monomials (using Theorem 1.23).
    
     □
    

Next we analyse the exponential and trigonometric functions, which are deﬁned by

$\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{7}$

$$ \begin{align} \label {def-exp-sin-cos} \left \{ $$ \begin{aligned} \exp (x) & = \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {x^k}{k!} \\ \sin (x) &= \sum _{k=0}^\infty (-1)^k \frac {x^{2k+1}}{(2k+1)!} , \quad \cos (x) = \sum _{k=0}^\infty (-1)^k \frac {x^{2k}}{(2k)!} \end {aligned} \right . \end{align} $$ That these functions are well deﬁned, as well as the basic identities

$\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{8}$

$$ \begin{align*} \exp (x+y) &= \exp (x) \exp (y) \quad \forall x,y \in \R \\ \sin (x+y) &= \sin (x) \cos (y) + \cos (x) \sin (y)\quad \forall x,y \in \R \\ \cos (x+y) &= \cos (x) \cos (y) - \sin (x) \sin (y)\quad \forall x,y \in \R , \end{align*} $$ are assumed to be known.

*   Theorem 1.28. 
    
    The functions $\exp$, $\sin$, $\cos$ are continuous at every point in $\R$.
    

*   Proof. First we prove that $\exp$ is continuous at $c=0$. For this we show the following inequality:
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{8}$
    
    $$ \begin{align} \label {ineq-exp} |\exp (x)-1| \leq e |x| , \quad \forall x\in [-1,1] , \end{align} $$ where $e = \exp (1)$. Indeed, we start by observing that
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{9}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} |\exp (x) -1| &= \left | \sum _{k=1}^\infty \frac {x^k}{k!}\right | = |x| \left | \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {x^k}{(k+1)!} \right |. \end{align*} $$ For $x\in [-1,1]$,
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{9}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} \left | \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {x^k}{(k+1)!} \right | & \leq \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {|x|^k}{(k+1)!} \\ & \leq \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {1}{(k+1)!} \\ & \leq \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {1}{k ! } = e . \end{align*} $$ and this proves (1.9). The continuity of $\exp$ at $0$ follows from (1.9) as in example 1.20.
    
    Let us prove that $\exp$ is continuous at $c\in \R$. For this consider a sequence $(x_n)_n$ in $\R$ such that $x_n\to c$ as $n\to \infty$. Recalling that $\exp (x+y) = \exp (x) \exp (y)$ for all $x,y\in \R$ we ﬁnd that
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{9}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} |\exp (x_n) - \exp (c)| & = \exp (c) | \exp (x_n - c) - 1 | \to 0\quad \text {as }n \to \infty , \end{align*} $$ because $x_n-c\to 0$ as $n \to \infty$ and $\exp$ is continuous at 0.
    
    Let us prove the continuity of $\sin$ at a point $c$. We claim that there exists $C_1>0$ such that
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{9}$
    
    $$ \begin{align} \label {sin-lipschitz} |\sin (x)-\sin (c) | \leq C_1 |x-c| \quad \text {for all } |x-c| \leq 1. \end{align} $$ indeed, we compute, for $|x-c|\leq 1$
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{10}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} |\sin (x)-\sin (c) | &= \left | \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {(-1)^k}{(2k+1)!} \bigl [ x^{2k+1} - c^{2k+1} \bigr ] \right | \\ &= \left | \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {(-1)^k}{(2k+1)!} (x-c) \sum _{j=0}^{2k} x^j c^{2k-j}\right | \\ & \leq |x-c| \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {1}{(2k+1)!} \sum _{j=0}^{2k} |x|^j |c|^{2k-j} \\ & \leq |x-c| \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {1}{(2k+1)!} \sum _{j=0}^{2k} \binom {2k}{j} |x|^j |c|^{2k-j} \\ & = |x-c| \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {1}{(2k+1)!} ( |x|+|c|)^{2k} \\ & \leq |x-c| \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {1}{(2k+1)!} ( 2|c|+1)^{2k}, \end{align*} $$ where we have used the formula $x^{2k+1} - c^{2k+1} = (x-c) \sum _{j=0}^{2k} x^j c^{2k-j}$, then the binomial expansion, and ﬁnally that $|x| = |x-c+c|\leq |x-c| +|c| \leq |c|+1$. The series
    
    $$ C_1 = \sum _{k=0}^\infty \frac {1}{(2k+1)!} ( 2|c|+1)^{2k} $$
    
    is convergent, which can be seen from the ratio test and this proves (1.10).
    
    From inequality (1.10) we deduce the continuity of $\sin$ at $x$. If $(x_n)_n$ is a sequence such that $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } x_n=c$, then there exists $n_0\in \N$ such that $|x_n-c|<1$ for all $n \geq n_0$. Then
    
    $$ |\sin (x)-\sin (c) | \leq C_1 |x_n-c| \quad \text {for all }n \geq n_0. $$
    
    This implies that $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty }\sin (x_n) = \sin (c)$.  □
    

###### Remark

. 

The continuity of $\sin$ and $\cos$ can also be proved ﬁrst at $c=0$ and then at an arbitrary $c\in \R$ using the formulas

$\seteqnumber{0}{1.}{10}$

$$ \begin{align*} \sin (x+y) &= \sin (x) \cos (y) + \cos (x) \sin (y)\quad \forall x,y \in \R \\ \cos (x+y) &= \cos (x) \cos (y) - \sin (x) \sin (y)\quad \forall x,y \in \R . \end{align*} $$

###### Example 1.29

. 

Consider $f,\,g:\R \to \R$, $f(x):=3y^2+5$, $y \in \R$, $g(x):=1+\sin (x)$, $x \in \R$, as in Example 1.25. Then $g$ is continuous on $\R$ because $\sin (x)$ is continuous, and $f$ is continuous on $\R$ because it is a polynomial, see Corollary 1.11. Thus, by Theorem 1.26,

$$ f\circ g:\R \to \R ,\qquad (f\circ g)(x) = 3(1+\sin (x))^2+5, $$

is continuous on $\R$.