#### 1.7 The inverse of a continuous function

Definition 1.33.

We say that $I \subset \R$ is an interval if it has the form $[a,b]$, $(a,b)$, $(a,b]$, $[a,b)$, $[a,\infty )$, $(a,\infty )$, $(-\infty ,b]$, or $(-\infty ,b)$.

Definition 1.34.

Let $I \subset \R$ be an interval and and $f\colon I \to \R$. We say that $f$ is _strictly increasing_ in $I$ if for all $x_1, x_2 \in I$

$$
x_1 < x_2 \quad \Longrightarrow \quad f(x_1) < f(x_2) .
$$

We say that $f$ is _strictly decreasing_ if for all $x_1, x_2 \in I$

$$
x_1 < x_2 \quad \Longrightarrow \quad f(x_1) > f(x_2) .
$$

The function $f$ is called strictly monotone if it strictly increasing or strictly decreasing.

It is direct that a strictly monotone function is injective.

Definition 1.35.

Let $I , J \subset \R$ and $f \colon I \to J$ be a bijection. We define the inverse function of $f$, denoted by $f^{-1}\colon J\to I$, as $f^{-1}(y) = x$ where $y\in J$ and $x\in I$ is the unique element in $I$ such that $f(x) = y$.

Lemma 1.36.

Let $I\subset \R$ be a non-empty interval and $f\colon I : \to \R$ be strictly monotone. Let $J= f(I)$ and $f^{-1}:J \to I$ be the inverse of $f$. If $f$ is strictly increasing then $f^{-1}$ is strictly increasing and if $f$ is strictly decreasing then $f^{-1}$ is strictly decreasing.

Proof.

Assume that $f$ is strictly increasing and let us show that $f^{-1}$ is strictly increasing. Suppose $y_1,y_2\in J$ and $y_1<y_2$. Let $x_1 = f^{-1}(y_1)$ and $x_2 = f^{-1}(y_2)$. Then $x_1,x_2\in I$ and $x_1\not =x_2$. If $x_1>x_2$ then $y_1 = f(x_1)>f(x_2) = y_2$, which is not possible. Hence $x_1<x_2$ and this shows that $f^{-1}$ is strictly increasing. □

Theorem 1.37.

Let $I$ be a non-empty interval and $f:I\to \R$ be continuous and strictly increasing on $I$. Then $J:=f(I)$ is an interval and $f^{-1}:J\to I$ is strictly increasing and continuous.

Proof.

One has to consider all the possible types of intervals. The simplest case is when $I = [a,b]$ with $a<b$, which is the one we are going to consider in detail. The other ones are left as exercises.

When $I = [a,b]$ we will see later that $f([a,b]) = [f(a),f(b)]$. For the moment we observe that $f(x) \in [f(a),f(b)]$ for $x\in [a,b]$, or equivalently, that $f([a,b]) \subset [f(a),f(b)]$. This follows from

$$
a < x < b \quad \Longrightarrow \quad f(a) < f(x) < f(b).
$$

As $f$ also respectively maps $a$ and $b$ to $f(a)$ and $f(b)$,

$$
x \in [a,b] \quad \Longrightarrow \quad f(x) \in [f(a), f(b)].
$$

We verify that $f([a,b]) = [f(a),f(b)]$. By the Intermediate Value Theorem 1.30, given $y \in (f(a),f(b))$, there exists $c\in (a,b)$ such that $f(c) = y$. As the values $f(a)$ and $f(b)$ are also in $[f(a),f(b)]$, we deduce that, for all $y \in [f(a),f(b)]$, there is a $c \in [a,\,b]$ such that $f(c) = y$.

By strict monotonicity, $f$ is injective. As $f\colon [a,b] \to [f(a),f(b)]$ is both injective and surjective, it is a bijection. By Lemma 1.36 $f^{-1}$ is strictly increasing.

Next we prove next that $f^{-1}$ is continuous. Let $y_0 \in (f(a),f(b))$ and let us prove that $f^{-1}$ is continuous at $y_0$. The cases $y_0 = f(a)$ or $y_0 = f(b)$ are similar.

Let $\varepsilon >0$ and $c = f^{-1}(y_0) \in (a,b)$. We choose $\varepsilon _1>0$ so that $\varepsilon _1<\varepsilon$ and $c+\varepsilon _1 \in (a,b)$. Since $f$ is strictly increasing we have $f(c+\varepsilon _1) >f(c)$.

We let $\delta _1 = f(c+\varepsilon _1) - f(c)>0$. Then for $y \in (f(c),f(c)+\delta _1) \cap ( f(a),f(b) )$, by strict monotonicity of $f^{-1}$,

$$
c < f^{-1}(y) <f^{-1}(f(c)+\delta _1) = f^{-1}( f(c+\varepsilon _1) ) = c+\varepsilon _1 < c+\varepsilon .
$$

In a similar way, there is $\delta _2>0$ such that for $y \in (f(c)-\delta _2,f(c)) \cap ( f(a), f(b) )$,

$$
c-\varepsilon < f^{-1}(y) < f(c).
$$

Letting $\delta = \min (\delta _1,\delta _2)$, we see that

$$
|f^{-1}(y) - f^{-1}(y_0)|<\varepsilon \quad \forall y \in (y_0-\delta ,y_0+\delta ) \cap (f(a),f(b)).
$$

□

###### Remark

.

If $I$ is a non-empty interval and $f:I\to \R$ be continuous and strictly decreasing on $I$, then $J:=f(I)$ is an interval and $f^{-1}:J\to I$ is strictly decreasing and continuous.

Exercise.

Find counterexamples to show that the above result no longer holds if either of the following hypotheses fail: (a) $f$ continuous on the interval; (b) $f$ not strictly increasing.
