MA10207 – Analysis 1 (Semester 2)
=================================

#### 2.3 The chain rule

The next result allows us to compute the derivative of the composition of two diﬀerentiable functions. We recall that the composition of $f\colon (A,B)\to \R$ and $g\colon (a,b)\to \R$ is deﬁned by $f\circ g(x) = f(g(x))$ for $x\in (a,b)$ (assuming $g((a,b))\subset (A,B)$).

*   Theorem 2.9 (Chain rule). 
    
    Let $f\colon (A,B)\to \R$ and $g\colon (a,b)\to \R$ be such that $g((a,b))\subset (A,B)$ so that $f\circ g$ is well deﬁned. Suppose that $g$ is diﬀerentiable at $c\in (a,b)$ and that $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $g(c)$. Then $f\circ g$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$, and
    
    $$ (f\circ g)^\prime (c) = f^\prime (g(c)) g^\prime (c). $$
    

For the proof the following lemma will be useful.

*   Lemma 2.10. 
    
    Let $f:(a,b)\to \R$ and let $c\in (a,b)$. The following two statements are equivalent:
    
    *   (i) $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$,with $f’(c) = L$.
        
    *   (ii) There is a function $q:(a,b)\to \R$, continuous at $c$, such that $q(c)=L$ and
        
        $$ f(x)-f(c)=q(x)(x-c), \quad \text {for all } x \in (a,b). $$
        

*   Proof. Deﬁne
    
    $$ q(x):=\left \{ \begin {aligned} & \frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c}, && x\in (a,b)\setminus \{c\},\\ & L, && x=c. \end {aligned} \right . $$
    
    Then,
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{2}$
    
    $$ \begin{eqnarray*} & &\mbox { $f$ is differentiable at $c$, with derivative $L$}\\ &\Longleftrightarrow & \lim _{x\to c}\frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c}=L\\ &\Longleftrightarrow & \lim _{x\to c}q(x)=q(c)\\ &\Longleftrightarrow & \mbox {$q$ is continuous at $c$.} \end{eqnarray*} $$
    
     □
    

*   Proof of Theorem 2.9. Let $c\in (a,b)$ and $\delta >0$ be small such that $(c-\delta ,c+\delta ) \subset (a,b)$. If $0<|h|<\delta$ and $g(c+h) - g(c)\not =0$. then we can write
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{2}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} \frac {f(g(c+h)) - f(g(c))}{h} &=\frac {f(g(c+h)) - f(g(c))}{ g(c+h) - g(c)} \frac { g(c+h) - g(c)} {h} . \end{align*} $$ Therefore it is convenient to deﬁne $Q:(A,B)\to \R$ by
    
    $$ Q(y):=\left \{ \begin {aligned} & \frac {f(y)-f(g(c))}{y-g(c)}, && y\in (A,B)\setminus \{ g(c) \},\\ & f’(g(c)), && y=g(c), \end {aligned} \right . $$
    
    which is continuous at $Q(c)$ by Lemma 2.10. Then for $0<|h|<\delta$ we have
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{2}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} \frac {f(g(c+h)) - f(g(c))}{h} &=Q ( g(c+h)) \frac { g(c+h) - g(c)} {h} . \end{align*} $$ Now we observe that
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{2}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} \lim _{h\to 0} Q ( g(c+h)) = Q(g(c)) = f’(g(c)) \end{align*} $$ by continuity of $g$ at $c$, which follows from Lemma 2.3, by continuity of $Q$ at $g(c)$, and from the composition of continuous functions, Theorem 1.26.
    
    Since
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{2}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} \lim _{h\to 0} \frac { g(c+h) - g(c)} {h} =g’(c) \end{align*} $$ because $g$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$, we deduce from the algebra of limits that
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{2}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} \lim _{h\to 0} \frac {f(g(c+h)) - f(g(c))}{h} &= \lim _{h\to 0} Q ( g(c+h)) \frac { g(c+h) - g(c)} {h} \\ &= f’(g(c)) g’(c). \end{align*} $$ This shows that $f\circ g$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ and that $(f\circ g)’(c) = f’(g(c)) g’(c)$.
    
     □
    

###### Example 2.11

. 

Let $c\in \R$, let $g:\R \to \R$, $g(x) = 1+\sin (x)$, and let $f:\R \to \R$, $f(y) = 3y^2+5$. From Theorem 2.8 $g$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ and $g’(c)=\cos (c)$. As $f$ is a polynomial, $f$ is diﬀerentiable at any $y$ and $f’(y)=6g(c)=6 y$, by Theorem 2.7. Applying the chain rule to $f\circ g:\R \to \R$, we deduce that, for all $c\in \R$, $f\circ g$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$, and

$$ (f\circ g)^\prime (c) = f^\prime (g(c)) \cdot g^\prime (c) = 6(1+\sin (c))\cos (c). $$

*   Theorem 2.12. 
    
    Let $f:(a,b)\to (\alpha ,\beta )$ be bijective and diﬀerentiable at $c \in (a,b)$. If $f’(c) \not =0$ and $f^{-1}$ is continuous at $f(c)$, then $f^{-1}$ is diﬀerentiable at $f(c)$ and
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{2}$
    
    $$ \begin{align} \label {der inverse} (f^{-1})’(f(c)) = \frac {1}{f’(c)}. \end{align} $$
    

*   Proof.
    
    Let $\gamma = f(c)$. Let $(y_n)_n$ be a sequence such that $y_n \in (\alpha ,\beta )$, $y_n\not =\gamma$ and $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } y_n = \gamma$. With the notation $x_n=f^{-1}(y_n)$,
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{3}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} \frac {f^{-1}(y_n) - f^{-1}(\gamma )}{y-\gamma } &= \frac {x_n-c}{f(x_n)-f(c)} . \end{align*} $$ Since $f^{-1} \colon (\alpha ,\beta )\to (a,b)$ is continuous at $\gamma$, we have $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } x_n = c$. By diﬀerentiability of $f$,
    
    $$ \lim _{n\to \infty } \frac {f(x_n)-f(c)} {x_n-c} = f’(c), $$
    
    and by algebra of limits for sequences (using that $f’(c)\not =0$),
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{3}$
    
    $$ \begin{align*} \lim _{n\to \infty }\frac {f^{-1}(y_n) - f^{-1}(\gamma )}{y-\gamma } &= \lim _{n\to \infty }\frac {x_n-c}{f(x_n)-f(c)} = \frac {1}{f’(c)}. \end{align*} $$
    
     □
    

###### Remark

. 

If in the previous theorem, $f^{-1}$ is known to be diﬀerentiable, then the formula for its derivative, (2.3), can be obtained from the chain rule. Indeed,

$$ f^{-1} \circ f = id $$

where $id(x) = x$ is the identity. Applying the chain rule, Theorem 2.9

$$ (f^{-1})’(f(c)) f’(c) =1 , $$

from which (2.3) follows.