MA10207 – Analysis 1 (Semester 2)
=================================

### Chapter 2 The derivative

#### 2.1 Diﬀerentiability at a point

*   Deﬁnition 2.1. 
    
    Let $a<b$, $f \colon (a,b)\to \R$, and let $c \in (a,b)$. We say that $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ if
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{0}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{align} \nonumber \lim _{h\to 0} \dfrac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h} \quad \text {exists }. \end{align} 
$$

    

###### Remark

. 

If $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ we write


$$
 f’(c) = \lim _{h\to 0} \dfrac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h} 
$$


and we say that $f’(c)$ is the derivative of $f$ at $c$. Some other common notation is


$$
 \frac {df}{dx}(c) = f’(c). 
$$


*   Deﬁnition 2.2. 
    
    Let $a<b$ and $f\colon (a,b) \to \R$. We say that _$f$ is diﬀerentiable on $(a,b)$_ if $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ for all $c \in (a,b)$,
    

###### Remark

. 

*   1. If $c \in (a,b)$ there exists $\delta > 0$ such that $(c-\delta , c+\delta ) \subseteq (a,b)$. Thus,
    
    
$$
 \frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h} 
$$

    
    is well-deﬁned for $0 < |h| < \delta$.
    
*   2. If $f:[a,b]\to \R$, to deﬁne the derivative of $f$ at $a$ it would be natural to consider
    
    
$$
 \frac {f(a+h)-f(a)}{h} . 
$$

    
    But this expression is _not_ well-deﬁned for $h< 0$, since $a+h$ is not in the domain of $f$. Thus, we can’t deﬁne $f^\prime (a)$ as a two-sided limit at $a$. It could be deﬁned as a one-sided limit, but we don’t pursue this direction in these notes and we don’t deﬁne diﬀerentiability of $f$ at $a$. Similarly, we don’t deﬁne diﬀerentiability of $f$ at $b$.
    
*   3. Substituting $x=c+h$, Deﬁnition 2.1 is equivalent to,
    
    
$$
 \lim _{x\to c}\frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c} \quad \text {exists}. 
$$

    
*   4.
    
    Deﬁnition 2.1 is equivalent to say that there exists $a \in \R$ such that for all $\varepsilon >0$ there exists $\delta > 0$ such that
    
    
$$
 0<|h|<\delta \qquad \Longrightarrow \qquad \Big | \frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h}-a \Big |<\varepsilon . 
$$

    
*   5. Deﬁnition 2.1 is equivalent to: there exists $a \in \R$ such that for all $\varepsilon > 0$ there exists $\delta > 0$ such that
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{0}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{align} \label {approx by linear} \left |x-c\right | < \delta \quad \Longrightarrow \quad \left |f(x)-\left [f(c)+a(x-c)\right ]\right | \leq \varepsilon \left |x-c\right |. \end{align} 
$$
 Note that if this is the case, $a$ must be equal to $f’(c)$.
    
*   6. If $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$, we deﬁne the tangent line to the graph of $f$ at $c$ by the equation
    
    
$$
 y = f(c) + f’(c)(x-c). 
$$

    
    Formula (2.1) is interpreted as saying that the tangent line at $(c,f(c))$ to the graph of $f$ is close to the graph of $f$, and the approximation gets better as we look closer to $c$.
    
*   7. In Figure 2.1 the chord through the points $(c,f(c))$ and $(c+h,f(c+h))$ is shown in red, while the graph of the function $f$ is shown in blue. The slope of the red chord is given by $\frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h}$, whose limit as $h\to 0$, if it exists, gives the slope of the tangent line to the graph of $f$ at $(c,f(c))$ (see Figure 2.2).
    

Figure 2.1: The red line has slope $\frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h}$.

Figure 2.2: Geometric interpretation of the derivative as the slope of the tangent line (in red) to the graph of $f$ (in blue) at $(c,f(c))$.

###### Example

. 

*   1. For $f:\R \to \R$, $f(x) = k$ where $k\in \R$ is a constant, we have $f’(c) = 0$ for all c. Indeed,
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{1}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{align*} \lim _{h \to 0} \frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h} = \lim _{h \to 0} \frac {k-k}{h} = 0. \end{align*} 
$$

    
*   2. Let $f:\R \to \R$ be given by $f(x) = a x$ where $a\in \R$. Then $f$ is diﬀerentiable at any $c\in \R$ and $f’(c) = a$. Indeed
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{1}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{align*} \lim _{h\to 0} \frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h} &= \lim _{h\to 0} \frac {a(c+h)-ac}{h} = a. \end{align*} 
$$

    
*   3. For $f:\R \to \R$, $f(x) = x^2$, we determine whether $f$ is diﬀerentiable at any $c\in \R$. Indeed,
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{1}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{align*} \frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h} = \frac {(c+h)^2-c^2}{h} = 2 c + h. \end{align*} 
$$
 Hence,
    
    
$$
 \lim _{h\to 0}\frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h} = \lim _{h\to 0} (2c+h)=2c. 
$$

    
    Thus, $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $1$ and $f’(c)=2c$.
    

*   Lemma 2.3. 
    
    Let $f:(a,b)\to \R$, and let $c\in (a,b)$. If $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$, then $f$ is continuous at $c$.
    

*   Proof.
    
    Assume that $f$ diﬀerentiable at $c$. Then, by algebra of limits,
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{1}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{align*} \lim _{x\to c}f(x) - f(c) &= \lim _{x\to c}\frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c} \cdot \lim _{x\to c}(x-c)\\ &= f^\prime (c) \cdot 0 = 0. \end{align*} 
$$
 Thus, $f$ continuous at $c$.  □
    

The converse is false, as we prove by constructing a counterexample that is continuous, but not diﬀerentiable.

###### Example 2.4

. 

Let $f:\R \to \R$, $f(x):= |x|$. We see that $f$ is continuous at $c=0$. However,

$\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{1}$


$$
 \begin{align*} \lim _{h\to 0^+} \frac {f(h)-f(0)}{h} &= \lim _{h\to 0^+} \frac {h-0}{h} = 1 \quad \text {but}\\ \lim _{h\to 0^-} \frac {f(h)-f(0)}{h} &= \lim _{h\to 0^-} \frac {-h-0}{h} = -1, \end{align*} 
$$
 as $|h| = -h$ for $h < 0$. Hence, by Lemma 1.16,


$$
 \lim _{h\to 0}\frac {f(h)-f(0)}{h} \quad \text {does not exist.} 
$$


Thus $f$ is not diﬀerentiable at $0$.

*   Theorem 2.5 (Algebra of derivatives). 
    
    Let $\alpha \in \R$ and let $f,g:(a,b)\to \R$ be diﬀerentiable at $c\in (a,b)$. Then:
    
    *   (i) $f+g$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ and
        
        
$$
 (f+g)’(c)=f’(c)+g’(c). 
$$

        
    *   (ii) $\alpha f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ and
        
        
$$
 (\alpha f)’(c)= \alpha f’(c). 
$$

        
    *   (iii) (Product Rule) $fg$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ and
        
        
$$
 (fg)’(c)=f’(c)g(c)+f(c)g’(c). 
$$

        
    *   (iv) If $g(c)\neq 0$, then $\dfrac {1}{g}$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ and
        
        
$$
 \left (\dfrac {1}{g}\right )’(c)=-\dfrac {g’(c)}{g^2(c)}. 
$$

        

*   Proof.
    
    (i) The linearity of the diﬀerence quotient here means that the algebra of limits may be used directly to prove this case.
    
    (ii) Exercise.
    
    (iii) We split the diﬀerence quotient into two parts:
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{1}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{eqnarray*} &&\frac {(f.g)(c+h) - (f.g)(c)}{h} \\ & &\qquad =\frac { f(c+h)g(c+h)-f(c)g(c)}{h}\qquad [\mbox {subtract and add }f(c+h)g(c)/h]\\ && \qquad = f(c+h)\frac {g(c+h)-g(c)}{h}+ g(c)\frac {f(c+h)-f(c)}{h}. \end{eqnarray*} 
$$

    
    By algebra of limits,
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{1}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{eqnarray*} &&\lim _{h\to 0} \frac {(f\cdot g)(c+h)-(f\cdot g)(c)}{h} \\ &&\quad = \quad \left (\lim _{h\to 0} f(c+h)\right )\left (\lim _{h\to 0} \frac {g(c+h)-g(c)}{h}\right ) + g(c) \lim _{h\to 0}\frac {f(c+h) - f(c)}{h} \\ &&\quad = \quad f(c) \cdot g^\prime (c) + g(c)f^\prime (c), \end{eqnarray*} 
$$

    
    using the diﬀerentiability of $f$ and $g$ at $c$, as well as the continuity of $f$, (which is ensured by Lemma 2.3).
    
    (iv) By the continuity of $g$ at $c$ (Lemma 2.3) and inertia (Lemma 1.8) there exists $\delta _0 > 0$ such that
    
    
$$
 0 < |h| < \delta _0 \quad \implies \quad |g(c+h)| > 0. 
$$

    
    Thus, we may assume $\delta \leq \delta _0$, when applying Deﬁnition 1.3. By the algebra of limits,
    
    $\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{1}$
    
    
$$
 \begin{eqnarray*} &&\lim _{h\to 0} \frac {1}{h} \left (\left (\frac {1}{g}\right ) (c + h) - \left (\frac {1}{g}\right )(c)\right ) \quad = \quad \lim _{h \to 0} \frac {g(c) - g(c+h)}{hg(c+h)g(c)}\\ &&\qquad = \quad -\frac {1}{g(c)}\cdot \lim _{h\to 0}\frac {1}{g(c+h)} \cdot \lim _{h\to 0} \frac {g(c+h)-g(c)}{h}\\ &&\qquad = \quad -\frac {1}{g(c)} \cdot \frac {1}{g(c)} \cdot g^\prime (c) \quad = -\quad \frac {g^\prime (c)}{g^2(c)}, \end{eqnarray*} 
$$

    
    using Lemma 2.3 and Theorem 1.10 part (iv).
    
     □
    

*   Corollary 2.6 (Quotient Rule). 
    
    Let $f,g:(a,b)\to \R$ be diﬀerentiable at $c\in (a,b)$. If $g(c) \neq 0$, then $f/g$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$, and
    
    
$$
 \Bigl (\frac {f}{g}\Bigr )’ (c) = \frac {f^\prime (c)g(c)-f(c)g^\prime (c)}{g(c)^2}. 
$$

    

*   Proof. It is left as an exercise.  □