MA10207 – Analysis 1 (Semester 2)
=================================

#### 2.4 Extremum points

*   Deﬁnition 2.13. 
    
    Let $I \subseteq \R$ be a non-empty interval, let $p,q \in I$, and let $f:I\to \R$. Then, $p$ is a _maximum point of $f$ in $I$_ if
    
    $$ f(x) \leq f(p) , \quad \forall x\in I. $$
    
    Also, $q$ is a _minimum point of $f$ in $I$_ if
    
    $$ f(x) \geq f(q) ,\quad \forall x \in I. $$
    
    An _extremum point_ is either a maximum or a minimum point.
    

###### Remark 2.14

. 

*   • $q$ is a min point is equivalent to, $q$ is a max point for $-f$.
    
*   • If $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ is continuous on $[a,b]$, by the Weierstrass Extremal Theorem 1.31, $f$ as a maximum and a minimum point in $[a,b]$.
    

###### Example 2.15

. 

Let $I=[-1,1]$, $f\colon I\to \R$, $f(x) = 2-x^2$. Then, $f(0) = 2 \geq 2-x^2\geq 1=f(1)=f(-1)$, for all $x \in [-1,1]$. Hence $0$ is a maximum point, and the minimum points are $1$ and $-1$. A sketch is shown in Figure 2.3.

Figure 2.3: Graph of $f(x) = 2-x^2$ over $[-1,1]$.

*   Deﬁnition 2.16. 
    
    Let $I \subseteq \R$ be non-empty and $f \colon I\to \R$. Then, $p\in I$ is a _local maximum_ of $f$ if there exists $\delta > 0$ such that
    
    $$ f(x) \leq f(p), \quad \forall x \in (p-\delta ,p+\delta ) \cap I . $$
    
    We say that $q \in I$ is a _local minimum_ of $f$ if there exists $\delta > 0$ such that
    
    $$ f(x) \geq f(q) , \quad \forall x \in (q-\delta ,q+\delta ) \cap I . $$
    

*   Theorem 2.17. 
    
    Let $a<b$ and $f \colon (a,b)\to \R$ have a local maximum or local minimum at $c\in (a,b)$. If $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ then $f’(c) = 0$.
    

*   Proof. Suppose that $c$ is a local minimum of $f$. Then there is $\delta >0$ such that
    
    $$ f(c) \leq f(x) \quad \forall x\in (c-\delta ,c+\delta ) \cap (a,b). $$
    
    For $c<x <\min (c+\delta ,b)$ we have $f(x) \geq f(c)$ and so
    
    $$ \frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c} \geq 0. $$
    
    Hence $f’(c) \geq 0$.
    
    For $\max (c-\delta ,a) < x < c$ we have $f(x) \geq f(c)$ and then
    
    $$ \frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c} \leq 0. $$
    
    This implies that $f’(c) \leq 0$ and we conclude that $f’(c)=0$.  □
    

*   Deﬁnition 2.18. 
    
    Let $I \subseteq \R$ be an interval, let $c \in I$, and let $f\colon I\rightarrow \R$. We say that $c \in I$ is a _critical point_ if $c$ is in the interior of $I$, $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $c$ and $f^\prime (c) = 0$.
    

In Example 2.15, $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $0$ and $0$ is in the interior of $[-1,1]$, so $f’(0)=0$. However, the minimum points $1$ and $-1$ are at the end-points of the domain of deﬁnition of $f$, and thus we cannot conclude that they are critical points of $f$.

We can summarize the previous results as follows.

*   Corollary 2.19. 
    
    Let $a,b \in \R$ satisfy $a < b$, let $f \colon [a,b]\to \R$, be continuous on $[a,b]$ and diﬀerentiable in $(a,b)$.Then,
    
    *   (i) There exist $p,q\in [a,b]$ such that $p$ is a maximum point and $q$ is a minimum point of $f$ in $[a,b]$.
        
    *   (ii) All extremum points of $f$ are either critical points of $f$ or endpoints of the interval $[a,b]$.
        

*   Proof.
    
    The Weierstrass Extremal Theorem (Theorem 1.31) implies (i). Now, suppose $p\in [a,b]$ is an extremum point of $f$. If $p = a$ or $p=b$, then (ii) is true. If $p \in (a,b)$, since $f$ is diﬀerentiable at $p$, $p$ is a critical point of $f$ by Theorem 2.17. So, (ii) is also true in this case too.  □
    

###### Example 2.20

. 

Find, with proof, all extremum points of $f\colon [-1, \frac {3}{2} ] \to \R$, $f(x) = x^2(3-2x)$. Apply Corollary 2.19.

###### Solution

. 

**Step 1.** We note that $f$ is continuous on $I= [-1, \frac {3}{2} ]$ and diﬀerentiable in $(-1, \frac {3}{2} )$. First we ﬁnd the critical points of $f$, that is, points in $(-1, \frac {3}{2} )$ where $f’$ is zero.

We compute $f^\prime (x) = 6x(1-x)$ and hence $f’(x) = 0$ if $x=0$ or $x=1$. Both points are in $(-1, \frac {3}{2} )$, and so are critical points of $f$.

**Step 2.** By Corollary 2.19, the extremum points of $f$ must be one of the critical points or the endpoints of $I$: $-1$, $0$, $1$, $\frac {3}{2}$. We evaluate $f$ at these points:

$$ f(-1) = 5, \quad f(0) = 0, \quad f(1) = 1, \quad f(\frac {3}{2}) = 0, $$

and deduce that the maximum point is $-1$, and the minimum points are $0$ and $\frac {3}{2}$. A sketch is shown in Figure 2.4.

Figure 2.4: Graph of $f(x) = x^2(3-2x)$ over $[-1,\frac {3}{2}]$.