# 2.5 The mean value theorem and consequences

The Mean Value Theorem is a useful tool that relates properties of a function with properties of its derivative. It has also a natural geometric interpretation.

We state first Rolle’s theorem, which is a special case of the Mean Value Theorem.

Theorem 2.21 (Rolle’s Theorem).

Let $a,b\in \R$ satisfy $a<b$. Let $f \colon [a,b]\to \R$ be continuous on $[a,b]$ and differentiable on $(a,b)$. If $f(a)=f(b)$, then there exists $c \in (a,b)$ such that $f^\prime (c) = 0$.

Proof.

By the Weierstrass Extremal Theorem (Theorem 1.31), there exist $p, q \in [a,b]$ such that $p$ is a max point of $f$ and $q$ is a min point of $f$, that is,

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{3}%%

$$
%%\begin{align} \label {max-min}%%

\begin{aligned} &f(x) \leq f(p) , \quad \forall x\in [a,b] \\ &f(x) \geq f(q) , \quad \forall x\in [a,b]. \end {aligned} %\end{align}%
$$

Suppose that $p\in (a,b)$. Then, by Theorem 2.17, $f^\prime (p)= 0$ and we obtain the conclusion with $c=p$.

If $q \in (a,b)$, again by Theorem 2.17, $f^\prime (q)= 0$ and we obtain the conclusion with $c=q$.

The remaining case is $p \notin (a,b)$ and $q \notin (a,b)$. This implies that $p \in \{a,b\}$ and $q\in \{a,b\}$. Since $f(a) = f(b)$ we deduce that $f(p) = f(q)$. From (2.4) we obtain therefore

$$

f(q) \leq f(x) \leq f(p) = f(q) \quad \forall x \in [a,b].


$$

But then $f$ is constant and $f’(c) = 0$ for all $c\in (a,b)$.

□

Theorem 2.22 (Mean Value Theorem).

Let $a<b$ and $f \colon [a,b]\to \R$ be continuous in $[a,b]$ and differentiable on $(a,b)$. Then, there exists $c \in (a,b)$ such that

$$

f^\prime (c) = \frac {f(b)-f(a)}{b-a}.


$$

Proof. Define $g\colon [a,b]\to \R$,

$$

g(x) = f(x) + \frac {f(b)-f(a)}{b-a}(b-x).


$$

Then, $g \colon [a,b]\to \R$ is continuous in $[a,b]$ and differentiable on $(a,b)$, by the algebra of continuity and derivatives. Also, $g(a) = f(b) = g(b)$. Hence by Rolle’s Theorem (Theorem 2.21), there exists $c \in (a,b)$ such that

$$

0 = g^\prime (c) = f^\prime (c) - \frac {f(b)-f(a)}{b-a}.


$$

□

A geometric interpretation of the mean value theorem is shown in Figure 2.5.

Figure 2.5: The graph of $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ is shown in blue. The red line has slope $\frac {f(b)-f(a)}{b-a}$ and is tangent to the graph of $f$ at $(c,f(c))$ for some $c\in (a,b)$.

### Example 2.23

.

1.  $f\colon [-1,1]\to \R$, $f(x)=2-x^2$, $f \in C([-1,1])$, $f$ is differentiable on $(-1,1)$, $f(-1) = f(1) = 1$. By Rolle’s Theorem (Theorem 2.21), there exists $c \in (-1,1)$ such that $f^\prime (c) = 0$.

2.  $f\colon [-1,0]\to \R$, $f(x) = x^2(3-2x)$. By the Mean Value Theorem (Theorem 2.22), there exists $c \in (-1,0)$ such that

$$

f^\prime (c) = \frac {f(0)-f(-1)}{0-(-1)} = \frac {0-5}{1} = -5.


$$

In some situations, the following generalization of the Mean Value Theorem is useful.

Theorem 2.24 (Cauchy Mean Value Theorem).

Let $a < b$ and $f,g \colon [a,b] \to \R$ be continuous on $[a,b]$ and differentiable on $(a,b)$. Then there exists $c \in (a,b)$ such that

$$

\left (f(b)-f(a)\right )g^\prime (c) = \left (g(b) - g(a)\right )f^\prime (c).


$$

If $g(x)=x$, this is the standard mean value theorem (Theorem 2.22).

If $g’(x) \not =0$ for all $x\in (a,b)$, we can write the following expression

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{4}%%

$$

\begin{align*} \frac {f(b)-f(a)}{g(b)-g(a)} = \frac {f’(c)}{g’(c)}. \end{align*}


$$

Proof. Consider $h\colon [a,b]\to \R$,

$$

h(x)=\left (f(b)-f(a)\right )g(x) - \left (g(b)-g(a)\right )f(x).


$$

Then,

$$

h(a) = f(b)g(a)-g(b)f(a) = k(b).


$$

Since $h \colon [a,b]\to \R$ is continuous on $[a,b]$ and differentiable on $(a,b)$, we may apply Rolle’s Theorem, Theorem 2.21, to deduce that there exists $c \in (a,b)$ such that

$$

0 = h^\prime (c) = \left (f(b)-f(a)\right )g^\prime (c) - \left (g(b)-g(a)\right )f^\prime (c).


$$

□

Next we mention some applications of the Mean Value Theorem.

## Constant functions

Corollary 2.25.

Let $a < b$, $f \colon [a,b]\to \R$ be continuous on $[a,b]$ and differentiable on $(a,b)$. If $f^\prime (x) = 0$ for all $x \in (a,b)$, then $f$ is constant in $[a,b]$.

Proof.

Let $d\in (a,b]$, and consider the restriction of $f$ to $[a,d]\subseteq [a,\,b]$. Note that the hypotheses of the Mean Value Theorem (Theorem 2.22) are satisfied on $[a,\,d]$, that is, $f\colon [a,d] \to \R$ is continuous on $[a,d]$ and differentiable on $(a,d)$. Hence, there exists $c \in (a,d) \subseteq (a,b)$ such that

$$

\frac {f(d)-f(a)}{d-a} =f^\prime (c)=0,


$$

and therefore $f(d)=f(a)$. Thus, for all $x\in [a,b]$, $f(x)=f(a).$ □

## Monotonicty and derivatives

In Definition 1.34 we gave the notions of strictly increasing and strictly decreasing functions. We include here the notions of increasing and decreasing functions.

Definition 2.26.

Let $I$ be an interval and $f\colon I\to \R$. We say that $f$ is increasing in $I$ if for all $x_1,x_2\in I$,

$$

x_1\leq x_2 \Longrightarrow f(x_1) \leq f(x_2).


$$

We say that $f$ is decreasing in $I$ if for all $x_1,x_2\in I$,

$$

x_1\leq x_2 \Longrightarrow f(x_1) \geq f(x_2).


$$

The monotonicity of a function can be analysed through its derivative.

Theorem 2.27.

Let $a<b$ and $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be continuous on $[a,b]$ and differentiable in $(a,b)$. Then

(i) $f$ is increasing in $[a,b]$ if and only if $f’(x)\geq 0$ for all $x\in (a,b)$.

(ii) If $f’(x)> 0$ for all $x\in (a,b)$ then $f$ is strictly increasing in $[a,b]$.

(iii) $f$ is decreasing in $[a,b]$ if and only if $f’(x)\leq 0$ for all $x\in (a,b)$.

(iv) If $f’(x)< 0$ for all $x\in (a,b)$ then $f$ is strictly decreasing in $[a,b]$.

Proof. We prove only (i) and leave the other properties as exercises.

Suppose that $f$ is increasing in $[a,b]$ and let $c\in (a,b)$. Then for $x\in (c,b)$, $f(x) \geq f(c)$. Therefore

$$

\frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c} \geq 0\quad \text {for } x\in (c,b).


$$

Since, by Theorem 1.16

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{4}%%

$$

\begin{align*} f’(c) = \lim *{x\to c} \frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c} = \lim *{x\to c^+} \frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c} \end{align*}


$$

we obtain that $f’(c) \geq 0$ using Lemma 1.9.

Suppose that $f’(x)\geq 0$ for all $x\in (a,b)$. Let $x_1,x_2 \in [a,b]$ with $x_1 < x_2$. Then by the mean value theorem, Theorem 2.22 there exists $c\in (x_1,x_2)$ such that

$$

\frac {f(x_2)-f(x_1)}{x_2-x_1} = f’(c).


$$

Since $f’(c)\geq 0$ and $x_2-x_1>0$ we conclude that $f(x_2)\geq f(x_1)$. □

### Example 2.28

.

Let $f\colon [0,1]\to \R$, $f(x) = x(2-x)$. Then, $f$ is continuous on $[0,1]$ and differentiable on $(0,1)$, $f^\prime (x) = 2-2x > 0$, $x \in (0,1)$. Hence, $f$ is strictly increasing on $[0,1]$.

## De l’Hospital’s Rule

### Example 2.29

(Non–rigorous use of De l’Hospital’s rule). We would like to find $\displaystyle \lim _{x\rightarrow 1}\frac { x^3+x - 2}{x^2 - 3x + 2}$ without resorting to $\varepsilon -\delta$ arguments. We can’t apply algebra of limits (Theorem 1.10) directly, since if $f(x) := x^3+x - 2$ is the numerator, and $g(x) = x^2 - 3x + 2$ is the denominator, $f(1)=g(1)=0$. But for small $x-1$

$$

f(x)\approx (x-1)f’(1),\quad \mbox { and }\quad g(x)\approx (x-1)g’(1) .


$$

This implies $\displaystyle \frac {f(x)}{g(x)}\approx \frac {f’(1)}{g’(1)}$ for small non–zero $x-1$, provided $g’(1)\neq 0$. In fact, one may show that if $g’(1)\neq 0$,

$$

\lim \_{x\rightarrow 1}\frac {f(x)}{g(x)}=\frac {f’(1)}{g’(1)}.


$$

Here, $f’(x)=3x^2+1$ and $g’(x)=2x-3$, so $f’(1)=4$, $g’(1)=-1$, and this argument suggests that $\displaystyle \lim _{x\rightarrow 1}\frac {f(x)}{g(x)}=-4$. The following more general result puts this on a rigorous basis.

Theorem 2.30 (De l’Hospital).

Let $f,g\colon (a,b)\to \R$ be differentiable at $c\in (a,b)$, and assume that $f(c)=g(c)=0\neq g’(c)$. Then,

$$

\lim \_{x\rightarrow c}\frac {f(x)}{g(x)}=\frac {f’(c)}{g’(c)}.


$$

Proof. For $x\in (a,b)\setminus \{c\}$, we observe that, since $f(c)=g(c)=0$ and $x-c\neq 0$,

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{4}%%

$$

\begin{align} \label {dlHospital} \frac {f(x)}{g(x)}=\frac {\frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c}}{\frac {g(x)-g(c)}{x-c}}. \end{align}


$$

Since both $f$ and $g$ are differentiable at $c$, Remark 2.1 implies that

$$

\lim _{x\rightarrow c} \frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c}=f’(c)\qquad \mbox {and}\qquad \lim _{x\rightarrow c} \frac {g(x)-g(c)}{x-c}=g’(c).


$$

Since $g’(c)\neq 0$, the algebra of limits for functions, Theorem 1.10 implies that

$$

\frac {f’(c)}{g’(c)}=\lim \_{x\rightarrow c} \frac {\frac {f(x)-f(c)}{x-c}}{\frac {g(x)-g(c)}{x-c}}.


$$

Since the limit of the right hand side of (2.5) exists, so does that of the left hand side, and we obtain

$$

\lim \_{x\rightarrow c}\frac {f(x)}{g(x)}=\frac {f’(c)}{g’(c)}.


$$

□

### Example 2.31

.

Let $c = 1$, $f,g: \left (\frac {1}{2},\frac {3}{2}\right )\setminus 1 \to \R$,

$$

f(x) := x^3+x - 2, \qquad g(x) = x^2 - 3x + 2.


$$

Then, by the differentiability of polynomials, Theorem 2.7, $f$ and $g$ are differentiable on $D = \left (\frac {1}{2},\frac {3}{2}\right )\setminus 1:$ $f^\prime (x) = 3x^2 + 1$, $g^\prime (x) = 2x-3$.

We check the conditions of Theorem 2.30:

1.  $\displaystyle \lim _{x \rightarrow 1} f(x) = 0 \lim _{x \rightarrow 1} g(x)$;

2.  $\frac {3}{2} \notin D$, so $g^\prime (x) \neq 0$ for all $x \in D$;

3.  $\displaystyle \lim _{x \to 1} \dfrac {f^\prime (x)}{g^\prime (x)} = \dfrac {4}{-1} = -4$ by algebra of limits, Theorem 1.10.

So, by De L’Hospital’s rule, Theorem 2.30,

$$

\lim \_{x\to 1} \frac {f(x)}{g(x)} = -4.


$$

In some situation we would like to compute ${\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c}}\frac {f(x)}{g(x)}$ without knowing that $f$ or $g$ are differentiable at $c$. Here is a version of De l’Hospital’s Rule that works in such a case.

Theorem 2.32 (De l’Hospital’s Rule).

Let $f,g\colon (a,b) \to \R$ be differentiable in $(a,b)$. Assume that

(a) $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to a^+} f(x) = 0$, $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to a^+} g(x) = 0$

(b) $g’(x)\not =0$ for all $x\in (a,b)$,

(c) ${\displaystyle \lim _{x\to a^+}} \frac {f’(x)}{g’(x)}$ exists.

Then

$$

\lim _{x\to a^+} \frac {f(x)}{g(x)} = \lim _{x\to a^+} \frac {f’(x)}{g’(x)} .


$$

Proof.

For the proof let $\tilde f,\tilde g:[a,b)$ be defined by

$$

\tilde f(x) = \begin {cases} f(x) & x\in (a,b) \\ 0 & x=0 \end {cases}, \quad \tilde g(x) = \begin {cases} g(x) & x\in (a,b) \\ 0 & x=0, \end {cases}


$$

so that $\tilde f$ and $\tilde g$ are continuous at $a$. Let $(x_n)$ be any sequence in $(a,b)$ such that $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } x_n= a$. Let

$$

L = \lim \_{x\to a^+} \frac {f’(x)}{g’(x)}.


$$

Then by the Cauchy mean value theorem, Theorem 2.24, there exists $c_n \in (a,x_n)$ such that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{5}%%

$$

\begin{align*} \frac {f(x_n)}{g(x_n)} = \frac {f’(c_n)}{g’(c_n)} . \end{align*}


$$

Since $a<c_n<x_n$ and $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } x_n= a$, we also have $\displaystyle \lim _{n\to \infty } c_n= a$. By hypothesis,

$$

\lim \_{n\to \infty } \frac {f’(c_n)}{g’(c_n)} = L,


$$

and this shows that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{5}%%

$$

\begin{align*} \lim \_{n\to \infty }\frac {f(x_n)}{g(x_n)} = L. \end{align*}


$$

□

There are versions of the previous theorem for limits of the form $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to a^-} f(x)$ and $\displaystyle \lim _{x\to c} f(x)$, with almost the same proofs.

### Example 2.33

.

Compute

$$

\lim \_{x\to 0} \frac {1-\cos (x)}{x^2}.


$$

We use De l’Hospital’s Rule, in a variant of Theorem 2.32 for two-sided limits, which says that

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{5}%%

$$

\begin{align*} \lim *{x\to 0} \frac {1-\cos (x)}{x^2} &= \lim *{x\to 0} \frac {\sin (x)}{2x} \end{align*}


$$

if the last limit exists. But

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{5}%%

$$

\begin{align*} \lim \_{x\to 0} \frac {\sin (x)}{2x} = \frac {1}{2} \end{align*}


$$

by De L’Hospital’s rule, Theorem 2.30 or 2.32, and then

%%\seteqnumber{0}{2.}{5}%%

$$

\begin{align*} \lim \_{x\to 0} \frac {1-\cos (x)}{x^2} = \frac {1}{2}. \end{align*}
$$
