MA10207 – Analysis 1 (Semester 2)
=================================

### Chapter 3 The Riemann Integral

In this chapter we study the Riemann integral for functions $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ ($a\leq b$). Under certain hypothesis, we will deﬁne a number $\int _a^b f$, so that, if $f(x) \geq 0$ for all $x\in [a,b]$, $\int _a^b f$, can be interpreted as the area of the region


$$
 \{ (x,y ) \in \R ^2 \ | \ x\in [a,b],\ 0\le y \le f(x) \}. 
$$

We refer to this area as the area under the graph of $f$, where the graph of $f$ is $\{ (x,y ) \in \R ^2 \ | \ x\in [a,b], \ y = f(x) \}$. A sketch of this region is shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3.1: Area under a curve

#### 3.1 Upper and lower Riemann sums

Let $a\leq b$ and $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$. The main idea in the deﬁnition of Riemann integral, is to approximate the area under the graph of $f$ by a sum of areas of rectangles. To do this, we subdivide $[a, b]$ into several intervals, and consider rectangles with one side given by each interval in the subdivision and the other side an appropriate height. We make two approximations this way: an overestimate, using the highest value of the function on each interval, and an underestimate using the lowest values. As we choose increasingly ﬁne subdivisions, we hope that the diﬀerence between these approximations decreases.

First, let us recall the following notation.

Deﬁnition 3.1. 

A function $f\colon D\to \R$, where $D\subset \R$, is called bounded if there exists $M\in \R$ such that


$$
 |f(x)|\leq M , \quad \forall x\in [a,b]. 
$$

If $f\colon D\to \R$ is bounded and $A\subset D$ is non-empty, we deﬁne


$$
 \sup _A f = \sup \, \{\, f(x) \ | \ x\in A\, \},\quad \inf _A f = \inf \ \{\, f(x) \ | \ x\in A\, \}, 
$$

which are called the supremum and inﬁmum of $f$ over $A$ respectively.

Deﬁnition 3.2. 

A _subdivision_ (or _partition_, or _dissection_) $P$ of $[a, b]$ is a ﬁnite set $P \subset [a,b]$ such that $a\in P$ and $b \in P$. When working with a subdivision $P$ of $[a,b]$ we always use the following notation: $P = \{x_0, x_1, \dotsc , x_n\}$ with


$$
 a = x_0 < x_1 < \dotsb < x_n = b. 
$$

The set $P$ divides $[a, b]$ into $n$ subintervals. For each $i = 1, \dotsc , n$ we write $I_i = [x_{i-1}, x_i]$. The interval $I_i$ is called the $i^{\mathrm {th}}$ interval of $P$, and $|I_i| = x_i - x_{i-1}$ is called the _length_ of $I_i$.

To approximate the area we also need to decide how tall each rectangle will be. We will make two approximations: an overestimate, using the largest value of the function on each interval, and an underestimate, using the smallest value of the function on each interval.

Deﬁnition 3.3. 

Let $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be bounded and $P = \{x_0, \dotsc , x_n\}$ be a subdivision of $[a, b]$ with $P = \{x_0, x_1, \dotsc , x_n\}$ and $a = x_0 < x_1 < \dotsb < x_n = b$. The _lower Riemann sum_ of $f$ for $P$, denoted $L(f, P)$, is deﬁned as


$$
 L(f, P) := \sum _{i = 1}^n \, (\inf _{I_i} f) \, |I_i| . 
$$

The _upper Riemann sum_ of $f$ for $P$, denoted $U(f, P)$, is deﬁned as


$$
 U(f, P) := \sum _{i = 1}^n\, (\sup _{I_i} f) \, |I_i| . 
$$

The upper sums are supposed to be overestimates of the area under the graph of $f$, and the lower sums underestimates, with actual area somewhere between the two, although “the area under the graph of $f$” has not been deﬁned yet (and maybe it can’t be deﬁned). A sketch of lower and upper Riemann sums are shown in Figure 3.1.

Figure 3.2: Area in blue represents the lower Riemann sum and are in red the upper Riemann sum associated to a subdivision $P=\{x_0,\ldots ,x_5\}$.

The following inequality is a direct consequence of the deﬁnitions.

Lemma 3.4. 

Let $f\colon [a, b] \rightarrow \mathbb {R}$ be bounded, and let $P$ be a subdivision of $[a, b]$. Then


$$
 L(f, P) \leq U(f, P). 
$$

Proof.

Write $P = \{x_0, x_1, \dotsc , x_n\}$, $a = x_0 < x_1 < \dotsb < x_n = b$, $I_j=[x_{j-1},x_j]$. We have


$$
 \inf _{I_j} f \leq \sup _{I_j} f \quad \forall j=1,\ldots ,n, 
$$

and hence


$$
 L(f, P) = \sum _{j= 1}^n \, (\inf _{I_j} f) \, |I_i| \leq \sum _{j = 1}^n \, (\sup _{I_j} f) \, |I_i| = U(f, P). 
$$

 □

There is however a much stronger inequality, which is crucial in deﬁning the notion of Riemann integrability.

Theorem 3.5. 

Let $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be bounded and $P,Q$ be subdivisions of $[a,b]$. Then


$$
 L(f,P) \leq U(f,Q). 
$$

To prove this proposition we will use the next lemma, which states that as subdivisions get ﬁner, the gap between lower and upper Riemann sum decreases.

Lemma 3.6. 

Let $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be bounded and $P,Q$ be subdivisions of $[a,b]$ with $P \subset Q$. Then


$$
 L(f,P) \leq L(f,Q) \leq U(f,Q) \leq U(f,P). 
$$

Proof.

For the proof of this lemma, we start with the following claim: if $Q = P \cup \{q\}$ for some $q\in [a,b]$ then



$$
 \being{align*} L(f,P) \leq L(f,Q). \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-3-0


If $q\in P$ then $P = Q$ and there is nothing to prove, so we assume that $q \not \in P$. Let us use the following notation


$$
 P = \{ x_0,\ldots , x_n\} , \quad x_0 = a < x_1 < \ldots < x_n = b. 
$$

Then we can ﬁnd a unique index $k\in \{1,\ldots ,n\}$ such that $x_{k-1} < q < x_k$. We can say that $[x_{k-1},x_k]$ has been split into the intervals $[x_{k-1},q]$ and $[q,x_k]$ by the addition of the point $q$. Therefore



$$
 \being{align*} L(f,P) = \sum _{j=1}^n \, ( \inf _{[x_{j-1},x_j]} f) \, ( x_j-x_{j-1} ) \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-3-0
 and



$$
 \being{align*} L(f,Q) &= \sum _{j=1}^{k-1} \, ( \inf _{[x_{j-1},x_j]} f) \, ( x_j-x_{j-1} ) \\ & \quad + \, ( \inf _{[x_{k-1},q]} f) \, ( q-x_{k-1} ) + \, ( \inf _{[q,x_{k}]} f) \, ( x_k- q ) \\ & \quad + \sum _{j=k+1}^{n} \, ( \inf _{[x_{j-1},x_j]} f) \, ( x_j-x_{j-1} ) , \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-3-0
 where the last sum is not present if $k=n$. Therefore



$$
 \being{align} \label {diffQP} L(f,Q)-L(f,P) & = \, ( \inf _{[x_{k-1},q]} f) \, ( q-x_{k-1} ) + \, ( \inf _{[q,x_{k}]} f) \, ( x_k- q ) \\ \nonumber & \quad - \, ( \inf _{[x_{k-1},x_{k}]} f) \, ( x_k- x_{k-1}) \end{align} 
$$
^eq-3-0
 since all other terms cancel. We note then that



$$
 \being{align*} \inf _{[x_{k-1},x_{k}]} f \leq \inf _{[x_{k-1},q]} f , \quad \inf _{[x_{k-1},x_{k}]} f \leq \inf _{[q,x_{k}]} f, \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-3-1
 and therefore



$$
 \being{align*} (\inf _{[x_{k-1},x_{k}]} f ) ( x_q-x_{k-1}) & \leq ( \inf _{[x_{k-1},q]} f ) ( x_q-x_{k-1}) \\ (\inf _{[x_{k-1},x_{k}]} f)(x_k-q) &\leq (\inf _{[q,x_{k}]} f)(x_k-q). \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-3-1
 Adding this inequalities we get



$$
 \being{align*} (\inf _{[x_{k-1},x_{k}]} f ) ( x_k-x_{k-1}) \leq ( \inf _{[x_{k-1},q]} f ) ( x_q-x_{k-1}) + (\inf _{[q,x_{k}]} f)(x_k-q). \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-3-1
 This inequality is illustrated in Figure 3.1. We rearrange the previous inequality to get



$$
 \being{align*} \, ( \inf _{[x_{k-1},q]} f) \, ( q-x_{k-1} ) + \, ( \inf _{[q,x_{k}]} f) \, ( x_k- q ) - \, ( \inf _{[x_{k-1},x_{k}]} f) \, ( x_k- x_{k-1}) \geq 0. \end{align*} 
$$
^eq-3-1
 This combined with [[#^eq-3-1]] shows that


$$
 L(f,Q)-L(f,P)\geq 0, 
$$

which is the desired conclusion.

The inequality $L(f,P) \leq L(f,Q)$ for general subdivisions $P$, $Q$ of $[a,b]$ such that $P\subset Q$ is proved by induction on the number of points in $Q \setminus P$.

Finally, the inequality $U(f,P) \geq U(f,Q)$ for $P\subset Q$ is proved analogously.  □

Figure 3.3: Illustrates the inequality $\displaystyle (\inf _{[x_{k-1},x_{k}]} f ) ( x_k-x_{k-1}) \leq ( \inf _{[x_{k-1},q]} f ) ( x_q-x_{k-1}) + (\inf _{[q,x_{k}]} f)(x_k-q)$ for $x_{k-1}<q<x_k$.

The previous lemma motivates the following deﬁnition.

Deﬁnition 3.7. 

Let $P , Q$ be subdivisions of $[a, b]$. We say that $Q$ is a reﬁnement of $P$ if $P \subset Q$.

When we add extra points to a subdivision (and thus split its intervals into smaller intervals) we create a _reﬁnement_. Reﬁning a subdivision by adding more points gives more accurate approximations to the area.

We can state Lemma 3.6 as: Let $f\colon [a,b]\to \R$ be bounded and $P,Q$ be subdivisions of $[a,b]$. If $Q$ is a reﬁnement of $P$, then


$$
 L(f,P) \leq L(f,Q) \leq U(f,Q) \leq U(f,P). 
$$

We are now ready to give the proof of Theorem 3.5.

Proof of Theorem 3.5.

Let $R = P \cup Q$. Then $R$ is a subdivision of $[a,b]$ and a reﬁnement of both $P$ and $Q$. By Lemma 3.6,


$$
 L(f, P) \leq L(f, R) \leq U(f, R) \leq U(f, Q). 
$$

(The central inequality comes from Lemma 3.4.)  □