# Derivation of the Heat Equation

Consider a rigid metal rod lying along the $x$-axis, with sides that are insulated to prevent heat loss. This is modeled as a 1D isolated rod with,

- $\rho \unit{kg.m^{-1}}$ be the mass density per unit length,
- $c \unit{J.kg^{-1}.K^{-1}}$ the specific heat,
- and $T(x,t)\unit{K}$ be the temperature of the rod.

Thus the internal energy per unit length will be the product $\rho c T$.

To consider how the temperatures of different parts of the rod change over time, we define the heat *flux*, $q(a,t)$, to be the amount of heat that moves across the surface $x = a$ per unit time.

> By convention we suppose that $q>0$ means that heat is flowing the positive $x$ direction.

Consider a small interval $[a, a + h]$ of the rod. First, the internal heat energy in this segment is given by

$$
U_{[a, a + h]} = \int_a^{a + h} \rho c T(x,t) \rd x.
$$

^eq-10-3

In general there will also be a movement of heat (i.e. a heat flux) through the boundaries at $x = a$ and $x = a + h$. Thus

$$
\text {net heat flux in} = q(a, t) - q(a + h, t).
$$

^eq-10-4

If $q(a + h, t) > 0$ then heat is flowing out of the small interval, which explains the negative sign. By conservation of energy, the rate of change of internal energy must equal the net heat flux into the interval. Hence,

$$
\dd{}{t} \int_a^{a + h} \rho c T(x,t) \rd x
= -\Bigl[ q(a + h, t) - q(a, t) \Bigr].
$$

^eq-10-5

Since the limits of integration are fixed we can exchange the $\dd{}{t}$ with the integral (ref this, Leibniz Rule maybe? #todo),

$$
\int_a^{a + h} \dd{}{t} \Big(\rho c T(x,t) \Big) \rd x
= -\Bigl[ q(a + h, t) - q(a, t) \Bigr].
$$

and moreover using the [[Fundamental Theorem of Calculus]] we can re-write the RHS as in terms of $\frac{\p q}{\p x}$,

$$
q(a + h, t) - q(a, t) = \int_a^{a + h} \frac{\p q}{\p x} \rd x
$$

giving us,

$$
   \int_a^{a + h} \rho c \pdiff{T}{t} \rd x
= -\int_a^{a + h} \pdiff{q}{x} \rd x \\\\
$$

^eq-10-6

or equivalently,

$$
\int_a^{a + h} \rho c \pdiff{T}{t} + \pdiff{q}{x} \rd x.
$$

^eq-10-7

Now because the above must hold for all possible values of $a$ and $a + h$, then by [[10.0 The Bump Lemma]], it must be the case that the integrand vanishes. Hence we can conclude that

$$
\rho c \pdiff {T}{t} = -\pdiff {q}{x}.
$$

^heat-equation-base

Now we need to relate the heat flux $q$ and the temperature $T$. The most obvious law for this is [[Fourier's Law]][^1] and is given by,

$$
q(x,t) = -k \pdiff{T}{x},
$$

where $k$ is a constant known as the thermal conductivity of the material. The negative sign reflects the fact that heat flows *down a temperature gradient*, from a region of higher temperature to one of lower temperature.

[^1]: This is an example of a [[Consitutive Relation]], others are of course possible but this is yet uncovered.

Applying this [[#^heat-equation-base]] now becomes

$$
\pdiff {T}{t} = \kappa \pdiff {^2 T}{x^2},
$$

^1d-heat-equation

where $\kappa := k/(\rho c)$ is a material constant known as the thermal diffusivity.
