#### 18.1 The 1D heat equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions

Let $u = U(x,t)$ and $u = V(x,t)$ be two solutions of the 1D heat system with zero Dirichlet boundary conditions as formulated in definition 14.15:


$$ \begin{gather} u_t = \kappa u_{xx}, \\ u(0, t) = 0 = u(L, t), \\ u(x, 0) = f(x). \end{gather} $$

^eq-18-10
 
 Our goal is to show that necessarily $U \equiv V$; then there is in fact only one solution to the problem; it is unique. Let $W(x,t) = U(x,t) - V(x,t)$. Then the difference $W(x,t)$ satisfies


$$ \begin{gather} W_t = \kappa W_{xx}, \\ W(0, t) = 0 = W(L, t), \\ W(x, 0) = 0. \end{gather} $$

^eq-18-20

Physically, $W$ is the solution of the heat diffusion problem for a rod that is held at zero temperature at both ends, and begins at zero temperature throughout. On physical grounds we would then expect that $W(x,t) \equiv 0$. How can we show this?

We define the ‘energy’ $E(t)$


$$  E(t) = \frac {1}{2} \int _0^L \left [W(x,t)\right ]^2 \ \rd {x} \ \geq 0 \, . $$

^eq-18-2


Now differentiate with respect to time to obtain


$$ \begin{align} \diff {E}{t} & = \int _0^L W \pdiff {W}{t} \ \rd {x}, \notag \\ & = \int _0^L W\left (\kappa \pdiff {{}^2W}{x^2} \right ) \ \rd {x}, \notag \\ & = \kappa \int _0^L \pdiff {}{x}\left (W \pdiff {W}{x}\right ) - \left (\pdiff {W}{x}\right )^2 \ \rd {x}.  \end{align} $$

^eq-18-3

where the second line follows by substituting directly from the heat equation and the third line is just a straightforward manipulation. From the last line above, the first term can be integrated directly, and then we can use the boundary conditions $W = 0$ at $x = 0, L$ to show that it vanishes. Hence we have just


$$ \diff {E}{t} = -\kappa \int _0^L \left (\pdiff {W}{x}\right )^2 \ \rd {x} \leq 0. $$

^eq-18-4


This indicates that $E(t)$ cannot increase in time. Moreover $W(x,0)=0$ so initially $E(0)=0$ also. Therefore we must have $E(t) = 0$ for all $t>0$. Hence


$$ E(t) = \int _0^L \left [W(x, t)\right ]^2 \ \rd {x} = 0 \quad \text {for all} \quad t\geq 0 \, . $$

^eq-18-5


And the only way that the integral of a non-negative function can vanish is when $W(x,t) \equiv 0$. Hence $U(x,t) \equiv V(x,t)$ and the solution is unique.

We have proved the following theorem.

###### Theorem 18.1

.  The solution of the 1D heat equation with zero Dirichlet conditions in [[#^eq-18-1]] is unique.

**Remark:** This proof extends immediately to the case of inhomogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions

**Remark:** A possibly more natural approach is to re-order the above argument: starting with the heat equation, multiply by $u$ and integrate over the domain to obtain


$$ \int _0^L u u_t \, \rd {x} = \kappa \int _0^L u u_{xx} \, \rd {x}. $$
^eq-18-6


Then write $u u_t = (\frac {1}{2}) \partial u^2/\partial t$, exchange the time derivative with the $x$-integration (as the integration limits are independent of time) and use the fact that $\partial _x (uu_x) = u_x^2 + u u_{xx}$ to rewrite the right hand side. This yields exactly [[#^eq-18-4]].