# Naive set theory

A **set** is a collection of things, called its **elements**. We write $x \in A$ to mean that $x$ is an element of the set $A$ and $x \notin A$ to mean that it isn't. A set can be specified by writing a list of its elements between curly brackets and . Thus $A = \set{ 1 , 2 , 5 }$ is a set with three elements, which are all numbers. Then, for example, $5 \in A$ , but $4 \notin A$ .

Sets with the same elements are considered to be the same, so repeats and reordering the list don’t change the set:

$$
\set{1, 2, 2} = \set{1, 2} = \set{2, 1}.
$$

The empty list is allowed, so $\set{}$ is a set with no elements.

A set is also a ‘thing’ so can be part of another set. For example, $B = \set{\set{1, 2} , \set{3, 4, 5}}$ is a set with two elements, both of which are themselves sets. Note that $B$ is different from $\set{ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5}$, which is a set with five elements, all of which are numbers. As another example, $\set{2} \neq 2$ and $\set{ \set{2}} \neq \set{2}$.

## Set by Predicate

Given some predicate $P(x)$ we can define a subset $A$ of some set $U$ to be,

$$
A = \set{ x \in U : P(x)}
$$

this can be taken further by considering some function $f : U \to V$ giving us $B$,

$$
B = \set{f(x) : x \in U \land P(x)}\sub V
$$

which is the image of $f$ under $A$.

## Set Relations

For sets $A$ and $B$ ,

- Subset, $A \sub B \iff a \in A \implies a \in B$.
- Equality, $A = B \iff \Big[a \in A \iff a \in B\Big]$.
    - Equivalently $A = B \iff A \sub B \land B \sub A$.
- Strict Subset, $A \subset B \iff A \sub B \land A \neq B$

Using these we define emptiness as a set $A$ such that $x \in A$ is never true. We write this set (proved unique below) as $\set{}$, $\varnothing$ or $\emptyset$.

[[Lemmas on the Empty Sets]]

## Well known Sets

Here are some familiar sets of numbers and their standard names.

- Positive Integers $ℤ^{+} = \set{1, 2, 3, \dots}$.
- Natural Numbers (including zero) $ℕ_{0} = \set{0, 1, 2, \dots}$.
- Integers $ℤ = \set{\dots, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, \dots}$.
- Rationals $ℚ = \set{ \frac mn : m, n\inℤ \land n\neq 0 }$.
- Real Numbers $ℝ$ (defined in Analysis 1).
- Complex numbers $ℂ = \set{x + i y : x , y \in \R}$, where $i^{2} = - 1$ , by definition.

We consider that $ℤ^{+} \subseteq ℕ_{0} \subseteq ℤ \subseteq ℚ \subseteq ℝ \subseteq ℂ$ , by identifying $m \in ℤ$ with $m / 1 \in ℚ$ and $x \in ℝ$ with $x + i 0 \in ℂ$ . We leave the embedding $ℚ \subseteq ℝ$ for Analysis 1 also.

---

[[Power Set]]

---

## Cardinality of Finite Set

If $A$ is a finite set, the **size** or **cardinality** of $A$ is the number of elements in $A$ and is written $\left|A\right|$ .

For example, $\left|\set{ 4 , 5 }\right| = 2$ and $\left|∅\right| = 0$ .

---

## Operations on Set

Given sets $A$ and $B$ we can form their

- **union** $A \cup B = \set{ x : \text{ }x\in A\text{ or }x\in B\text{ } }$
- **intersection** $A \cap B = \set{ x : \text{ }x\in A\text{ and }x\in B\text{ } } = \set{ x \in A : x \in B }$
- **difference** $A \backslash B = \set{ x \in A : x \notin B }$

When $B \subseteq A$ , the difference $A \backslash B$ is called the **complement** of $B$ (in $A$ ). Note that the definition of union strictly breaks the rules above, but we can get away with it because the choice of elements is not unlimited.

Given an indexed collection of sets $\set{ A_{j} : j \in J }$, where $J$ is some (non-empty) index set, e.g. $J = \set{ 1 , \dots  , n }$, we can form their

- **union** $(\cup)_{j \in J} A_{j} = \set{ x : x\in A_{j}\text{ for some }j\in J }$
- **intersection** $(\cap)_{j \in J} A_{j} = \set{ x : x\in A_{j}\text{ for all }j\in J }$

For example, suppose that $A_{1} = \set{ 5 , 6 }$, $A_{2} = \set{ 6 , 7 }$ and $A_{3} = \set{ 6 , 8 , 9 }$. Then in this case the index set $J = \set{ 1 , 2 , 3 }$ and we have

$$
\underset{j \in J}{\cup} A_{j} = \cup_{j = 1}^{3} A_{j} = \set{ 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 } \text{and} \underset{j \in J}{\cap} A_{j} = \cap_{j = 1}^{3} A_{j} = \set{ 6 }
$$

All these definitions have equivalent logical forms, such as

$$
x \in A \cup B \Leftrightarrow x\in A\text{ or }x\in B ,
$$

which should be used to prove basic identities for set operations, such as commutativity $A \cup B = B \cup A$ and associativity $( A \cup B ) \cup C = A \cup ( B \cup C )$ . We prove these by showing that the sets have the same elements, e.g.

$$
x \in A \cup B \Leftrightarrow x\in A\text{ or }x\in B \Leftrightarrow x\in B\text{ or }x\in A \Leftrightarrow x \in B \cup A .
$$

Since union is associative and commutative, we have well-defined multiple unions

$$
x \in A_{1} \cup \dots  \cup A_{n} \Leftrightarrow x\in A_{1}\text{ or }\dots \text{ or }x\in A_{n} \Leftrightarrow x \in \cup_{j = 1}^{n} A_{j}
$$

Note that similar applies to $\cap$, replacing “or” by “and”, which is also logically associative and commutative. However $A\backslash B\neq B\backslash A$ and $( A \backslash B )\backslash C\neq A\backslash( B \backslash C )$ , so you must think about the logic, not apply identities automatically.

Another way to produce new things from old is to form **ordered pairs, triples or $n$ -tuples**, denoted by enclosing a finite list in parentheses like so $(1,2)$. Equality is defined pairwise and repetition is allowed, for example, $(1, 2) \neq (2, 1) \neq (2, 1, 1)$.

---

## Cartesian products

**Cartesian products** of sets are defined as follows.

$$
\begin{align}
A\times B &= \set{ ( a , b ) : a \in A , b \in B }, & & \\ A\times B\times C & =\set{ ( a , b , c ) : a \in A , b \in B , c \in C }, & & \\ A_{1}\times\dots \times A_{n} & =\set{ ( a_{1} , \dots  , a_{n} ) : a_{i}\in A_{i}\text{ for }i=1,\dots ,n }. & &
\end{align}
$$

**Cartesian powers** of sets are defined as follows.

$$
\begin{align}
A^{2} & =A\times A,A^{3}=A\times A\times A, & & \\ A^{n} & =\set{ ( a_{1} , \dots  , a_{n} ) : a_{i}\in A\text{ for }i=1,\dots ,n }. & &
\end{align}
$$

For example, if $A = \set{ 1 , 3 }$ and $B = \set{ 4 , 5 }$, then $A \times B = \set{ ( 1 , 4 ) , ( 1 , 5 ) , ( 3 , 4 ) , ( 3 , 5 ) }$ and $A^{2} = \set{ ( 1 , 1 ) , ( 1 , 3 ) , ( 3 , 1 ) , ( 3 , 3 ) }$.

For finite sets, $\left|A \times B\right| =\left|A\right|\cdot\left|B\right|$ , $\left|A \times B \times C\right| =\left|A\right|\cdot\left|B\right|\cdot\left|C\right|$ , etc. and $\left|A^{n}\right| =(\left|A\right|)^{n}$.

The term “Cartesian” is in honour of the French mathematician and philosopher Descartes, who observed that you can model the plane by $ℝ^{2}$ and three-dimensional space by $ℝ^{3}$ . You can then model subsets of $ℝ^{2}$ , etc. using equations and inequalities. For example,

- $\set{(x , y) \in \R^2 : x^2 + y^2 = r^2}$ is the circle radius $r$ centred at $( 0 , 0 )$ ,
- $\set{(x , y) \in \R^2 : x \geq 0 , y \geq 0}$ is the positive quadrant.
