# 1.2 Transformation of logical expressions

These are laws about how to manipulate complex chains of conjunctions and disjunctions.

## Proposition 5(Distributive laws).

Given any three statements $P , Q , R$ , the following equivalences hold true.

$$
\begin{align}
P\wedge(Q \vee R ) \iff(P \wedge Q )\vee(P \wedge R ) \\ P\vee(Q \wedge R ) \iff(P \vee Q )\wedge(P \vee R ) &
\end{align}
$$

### Proof

It suffices to compare the truth tables. Here is the truth table (with an intermediate step) for $P \wedge (Q \vee R )$ .

\#todo

    $P$

    $Q$

    $R$

    $Q \vee R$

    $P \wedge (Q \vee R )$

Here is the truth table (with two intermediate steps) for $(P \wedge Q ) \vee (P \wedge R )$ .

\#todo

    $P$

    $Q$

    $R$

    $P \wedge Q$

    $P \wedge R$

    $(P \wedge Q ) \vee (P \wedge R )$

Comparing the last columns, we see that the first equivalence holds true. The second one is proved with the same method, but we omit the details here. □

## Proposition 6(De Morgan’s laws).

Given two statements $P$ and $Q$ , the following equivalences hold true.

$$
\begin{align}
\neg (P \vee Q ) \iff\neg P\wedge\neg Q \\ \neg (P \wedge Q ) \iff\neg P\vee\neg Q &
\end{align}
$$

### Proof

This is proved with the same method as Proposition 5. We omit the details. □

## Example 7

What is the negation of the statement $P \implies Q$ ?

We first recall that $\neg  P \vee Q$ is another way to write $P \implies Q$ . Then by De Morgan’s law,

$$
\neg  (\neg  P \vee Q ) \iff \neg  (\neg  P ) \wedge \neg  Q .
$$

But $\neg  (\neg  P ) \iff P$ . Hence

$$
\neg  (P \implies Q ) \iff P \wedge \neg  Q .
$$

That is, $P \wedge \neg  Q$ is another way to express $\neg  (P \implies Q )$ .

## Proposition 8(Contrapositive).

Given two statements $P$ and $Q$ , the implication

$$
P \implies Q
$$

is equivalent to

$$
\neg  Q \implies \neg  P
$$

### Proof

We already know that the implication $P \implies Q$ is equivalent to $(\neg  P ) \vee Q$ , which in turn may be written in the form $Q \vee (\neg  P )$ . Now we observe that $Q \iff \neg  (\neg  Q )$ , and therefore, we conclude that $Q \vee (\neg  P )$ is equivalent to $\neg  (\neg  Q ) \vee (\neg  P )$ . Finally, the last statement can be written in the form $\neg  Q \implies \neg  P$ . □
