## 1.3 The notation of set theory

Again we begin with a definition of the sort of object we consider here.

### Definition 9

A **set** is a collection of distinct objects. These objects are called the **elements** of the set.

The order of the elements doesn’t matter. For example, the set $\{ 1 , 2 , 3 \}$ comprises the numbers $1$ , $2$ , and $3$ , and is exactly the same as $\{ 3 , 2 , 1 \}$. That is,

$$
\{ 1 , 2 , 3 \} = \{ 3 , 2 , 1 \} .
$$

The following is some notation that we use in connection with sets. First we have some statements related to sets.

**Notation**

**Meaning**

$x \in A$

$x$ is an element of the set $A$.

$x \notin A$

$x$ is not an element of the set $A$.

$A \subseteq B$

$A$ is a **subset** of another set $B$; i.e., every element of $A$ is also an element of $B$.

Here is some notation related to forming new sets from two given sets $A$ and $B$ .

**Notation**

**Meaning**

$A \cap B$

The **intersection** of $A$ and $B$ (i.e., the set containing all objects that are elements of $A$ and of $B$).

$A \cup B$

The **union** of $A$ and $B$ (i.e., the set containing all objects that are elements of $A$ or of $B$).

$A \backslash B$

The **set difference** (i.e., the set of all elements of $A$ that are not elements of $B$).

$A \times B$

The **Cartesian product**, comprising all pairs $(a , b )$ with one element $a \in A$ and one element $b \in B$.

Finally, here are some specific sets that we will use often.

**Notation**

**Meaning**

$\oslash$

The **empty set** (i.e., the set containing no objects at all).

$\N = \{ 1 , 2 , 3 , \dots  \}$

The set of **natural numbers**.

$\Z = \{ \dots  , - 2 , - 1 , 0 , 1 , 2 , \dots  \}$

The set of **integers**.

$\N_{0} = \{ 0 , 1 , 2 , \dots  \}$

The set of non-negative integers.

$\Q = \{p / q : p \in \Z \text{ and } q \in \N\}$

The set of **rational numbers** (numbers given as fractions).

$\R$

The set of **real numbers** (to be discussed later).

$\C$

The set of **complex numbers** (to be discussed even later).