### Quantifiers

Quantifiers are expressions that indicate how a variable is to be interpreted in a logical statement. Sometimes they are expressed by symbols, so that a logical statement can be represented in terms of a formula. We have two such symbols: $\forall$ stands for the phrase ‘for all’, and $\exists$ stands for ‘there exists’. For example, the formula

$$
\forall x : x \in \R \implies x^{2} \geq 0
$$

means

$$
\text{‘For all }x\text{, if }x\text{ is a real number, then }x^{2}\geq 0\text{.’}
$$

The formula

$$
\exists x : x \in \R \wedge x^{2} \geq 0
$$

means

$$
\text{‘There exists }x\text{ such that }x\text{ is a real number and }x\geq 0\text{.’}
$$

Both of these are of course true statements. Since most of the time, the variables in such a statement are taken from a specific set, there following usage of the quantifiers is also common:

$$
\forall x \in \R : x^{2} \geq 0
$$

(meaning ‘for all real numbers $x$ , the inequality $x^{2} \geq 0$ holds true’); and

$$
\exists x \in \R : x^{2} \geq 0
$$

(meaning ‘there exists a real number $x$ such that $x^{2} \geq 0$ ).

### Example 1.

Is this a true statement:

$$
\exists x \in \Z \forall y \in \N : x < y ?
$$

Yes, this is a true statement, because there does a exist an integer $x$ that is smaller than any natural number $y$ (e.g. $x = - 1$ will do).

We have seen De Morgan’s laws in Proposition 6, which tell us how conjunction and disjunction behave under negation. We have a similar law for quantifiers. In the following, we write $P (x )$ for a statement depending on a variable $x$ .

### Proposition 1.

1.  The statements

    $$
    \neg  (\forall x : P (x ) ) \text{and} \exists x : \neg  P (x )
    $$

    are equivalent.

2.  The statements

    $$
    \neg  (\exists x : P (x ) ) \text{and} \forall x : \neg  P (x )
    $$

    are equivalent.

This proposition should be intuitively clear. It is not proved here, because it belongs to the theory of logic rather than analysis.

### Example 1.

We have seen in Example 10 that

$$
\exists x \in \Z \forall y \in \N : x < y .
$$

Therefore, the negation of this statement, which is

$$
\forall x \in \Z \exists y \in \N : x \geq y ,
$$

is **not** true.