## 1.5 Functions

A question that we study a lot in analysis is how one varying quantity depends on another. The following concepts formalises the idea of quantities depending on one another.

### Definition 1.

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. A **function** from $A$ to $B$ is a rule that assigns to each element of $A$ a unique element of $B$ . We write $f : A \to B$ to indicate that the symbol $f$ denotes a function from $A$ to $B$ . Given any $a \in A$ , we then write $f (a )$ for the element from $B$ assigned to $a$ by the function. The set $A$ is called the **domain** of $f$ and $B$ is called the **codomain** or **target set** of $f$ .

So in order to specify a function, we need three things: a domain, a codomain, and a rule.

### Example 1.

We may define a function from $\R$ to $\R$ by assigning to every real number $x$ its square. This gives a function $f : \R \to \R$ with the property that $f (x ) = x^{2}$ for all $x \in \R$ .

As the example shows, an equation such as $f (x ) = x^{2}$ can be used to describe a specific function once the domain and codomain are known. Another way to refer to the same rule is $x \to tail x^{2}$ . The function should not be confused with the expression $x^{2}$ , however. In order to obtain a well-defined function, we need to say what the domain and the codomain are and we need to specify the rule. Even so, you will sometimes see phrases such as ‘the function $f (x ) = x^{2}$ ’. This wording is acceptable when the context leaves no doubt about the domain and codomain, but should not be used otherwise.

Not all functions are given by such a convenient formula.

### Example 1.

We may define a function $f : \R \to \Q$ as follows: if $x \in \R$ is a rational number, then $f (x ) = \frac{1}{2}$ . Otherwise $f (x ) = 0$ . Thus

$$
\begin{align}
f (x ) = \{\begin{matrix} 1/2 \text{if }x\in\Q, \\ 0 \text{otherwise}. \end{matrix}
\end{align}
$$