# Preface

The content of this unit naturally splits into two parts, which are loosely connected.

We first study functions defined on $\mathbb{R}^n$ or subsets thereof. We refer to these as functions of several real variables. The structure of $\mathbb{R}^n$ as a metric space was examined in MA20218, and you have also seen what it means for a function $f \colon U \to \mathbb{R}$, defined on an open set $U \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n$, to be continuous. We now study what it means for such a function to be _differentiable_. We will see that we have several notions of a derivative in this situation, and we will examine the relationships between them.

In the second part, we will study functions $f \colon U \to \mathbb{C}$, defined on a set $U \subseteq \mathbb{C}$. As you know, the complex plane $\mathbb{C}$ can be identified with $\mathbb{R}^2$ and has the same structure as a metric space. This situation may therefore superficially look similar to the case of functions of two real variables. But as you also know, the complex numbers have additional _algebraic_ structure that is not present in $\mathbb{R}^2$. Thus we should rather think of a function of one _complex_ variable.

If we adapt the ideas seen in previous analysis units, and in particular the idea of a derivative, to complex variables, then we find a remarkably beautiful theory. In particular, a lot of the complications coming from limited differentiability or from various notions of convergence fall away. Of course, this comes at a price, which is that complex differentiability is much more restrictive than the real counterpart. So we will have a very powerful theory, but it will apply only to a relatively small set of functions (which still includes rational, exponential, and trigonometric functions and much more).
