[[prev](MA10210se19.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se19.html#tailMA10210se19.html)] [[tail](#tailMA10210se20.html)] [[up](MA10210ch4.html#MA10210se20.html)]

### 4.5 [Eigenvalues and the characteristic polynomial](MA10210.html#QQ2-26-39)

Definition 1.  
Let $A\in M_{n , n}\left( \F \right)$ (a square matrix). A scalar $\lambda\in\F$ is called an eigenvalue of $A$ if there is a non-zero $v\in\left(\F\right)^{n}$ such that

$$
A v = \lambda v .
$$

In this case, $v$ is called an eigenvector of $A$ with eigenvalue $\lambda$ .

Note that if $v$ is an eigenvector of a square matrix $A$ with eigenvalue $\lambda$ , then any nonzero scalar multiple of $v$ , i.e. $av$ with $0\neq a\in\F$ , is also an eigenvector of $A$ with the same eigenvalue $\lambda$ , as

$$
A \left( a v \right) = a A v = a \left( \lambda v \right) = \lambda \left( a v \right) .
$$

Example 2.  

1.

Let $I\in M_{n , n}\left( \F \right)$ be the identity matrix. Then any nonzero vector in $\left(\F\right)^{n}$ is an eigenvector of $I$ with eigenvalue $1$ , as 
$$
Iv=v=1\cdot v,\forall v\in\left(\F\right)^{n}.
$$

2.

For $v\in N_{A}$ ,

$$
A v = 0 = 0 \cdot v ,
$$

so if $v\neq 0$ , then $v$ is eigenvector of $A$ with eigenvalue $0$ .

3.

Let $A=\begin{pmatrix} \lambda & 0 \\ 0 & \mu \end{pmatrix}\in M_{2 , 2}\left( \F \right)$ . Then $Ae_{1}=\lambda e_{1}$ and $Ae_{2}=\mu e_{2}$ . and so $e_{1}$ and $e_{2}$ are eigenvectors of $A$ with eigenvalue $\lambda$ and $\mu$ , respectively. Question: can $ae_{1}+be_{2}$ with $ab\neq 0$ be an eigenvector of $A$ ?

Next we explain how to find eigenvalues?

Definition 3.  
The characteristic polynomial of a square matrix $A\in M_{n , n}\left( \F \right)$ is

$$
\left(\Delta\right)_{A} \left( t \right) =  \det  \left( A - t I \right) ,
$$

where $I$ is the identity $n\times n$ -matrix.

Proposition 4.  
The eigenvalues of $A\in M_{n , n}\left( \F \right)$ are precisely the roots of $\left(\Delta\right)_{A}\left( t \right)$ .

Proof.

$$
\begin{align}
\text{}\lambda\text{ eigenvalue} & \Leftrightarrow\exists v\neq 0,\text{ s.t. }\left( A - \lambda I \right)v=0,\text{ i.e. }ker\left( \left(\phi\right)_{A - \lambda I} \right)\neq\left\{ 0 \right\} & & \\ & \Leftrightarrow\text{}\left(\phi\right)_{A - \lambda I}\text{ not injective} & & \\ & \Leftrightarrow\text{}\left(\phi\right)_{A - \lambda I}\text{ not bijective},\text{by Rank-Nullity, Theorem }\text{3.4.2}\text{} & & \\ & \LeftrightarrowA-\lambda I\text{ is not invertible}. & & \\ & \Leftrightarrow \det \left( \left(\phi\right)_{A} - \lambda I \right)=0,\text{by Theorem }\text{4.2.6}\text{.} & \square
\end{align}
$$

Lemma 5.  
If $A\in M_{n , n}\left( \F \right)$ then $\left(\Delta\right)_{A}\left( t \right)$ is a degree $n$ polynomial, with leading coefficient $\left(\left( - 1 \right)\right)^{n}$ . In particular, $A$ has at most $n$ eigenvalues.

Proof.

$$
\begin{align}
\left(\Delta\right)_{A} \left( t \right) = \begin{vmatrix} a_{1 1}-t & a_{1 2} & \dots  & \dots  & a_{1 n} \\ a_{2 1} & \ddots & & \ddots & \vdots \\ \vdots & & \ddots & & \vdots \\ \vdots & \ddots & & \ddots & a_{n - 1 n} \\ a_{n 1} & \dots  & \dots  & a_{n n - 1} & a_{n n}-t \end{vmatrix}
\end{align}
$$

is a polynomial in $t$ with the highest power of $t$ coming only from the $\sigma=id$ term

$$
\left( a_{1 1} - t \right) \left( a_{2 2} - t \right) \dots  \left( a_{n n} - t \right) = \left(\left( - t \right)\right)^{n} + \text{ lower terms} ,
$$

so the leading term of $\left(\Delta\right)_{A}\left( t \right)$ is always $\left(\left( - t \right)\right)^{n}$ and the degree of $\left(\Delta\right)_{A}\left( t \right)$ is $n$ . □

$A\in M_{n , n}\left( \F \right)$ has at most $n$ eigenvalues.

Lemma 6.  
Similar matrices have equal characteristic polynomial and thus have the same eigenvalues.

Proof. Suppose that $A$ and $B$ are similar with $A=PBP^{- 1}$ , where $P$ is invertible. Then

$$
\left(\Delta\right)_{A}\left( t \right)= \det \left( A - t I \right)= \det \left( P B P^{- 1} - t I \right)= \det P\left( B - t I \right)P^{- 1}
$$

$$
= \det P \det \left( B - t I \right) \det P^{- 1}= \det \left( B - t I \right)=\left(\Delta\right)_{B}\left( t \right),
$$

as claimed. □

Example 7.  
Compute eigenvalues and eigenvectors for $A=\begin{pmatrix} 1 & 3 \\ 3 & 1 \end{pmatrix}\in M_{2 , 2}\left( \Q \right)$ .

$$
\begin{align}
\left(\Delta\right)_{A} \left( t \right) = \begin{vmatrix} 1-t & 3 \\ 3 & 1-t \end{vmatrix} = \left(\left( 1 - t \right)\right)^{2} - 9 = \left( t - 4 \right) \left( t + 2 \right)
\end{align}
$$

and so the eigenvalues are $\lambda=4$ and $\lambda=-2$ .

For $\lambda=4$ :

$$
\begin{align}
A - \lambda I = \begin{pmatrix} -3 & 3 \\ 3 & -3 \end{pmatrix} \text{ and } N_{A - \lambda I} = \left<\begin{matrix} \begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix} \end{matrix}\right>
\end{align}
$$

For $\lambda=-2$ :

$$
\begin{align}
A - \lambda I = \begin{pmatrix} 3 & 3 \\ 3 & 3 \end{pmatrix} \text{ and } \left<\begin{matrix} \begin{pmatrix} -1 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix} \end{matrix}\right> .
\end{align}
$$

In this case the eigenvectors $\begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix}$ and $\begin{pmatrix} -1 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix}$ form a basis of $\Q^{2}$

Note.  
In the example above, let $P$ be the change of basis matrix from the standard basis to the basis $\alpha$ consisting of the two eigenvectors, i.e. $\left(col\right)_{1}P=\begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix}$ , $\left(col\right)_{2}P=\begin{pmatrix} -1 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix}$ and $P=\begin{pmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 1 & -1 \end{pmatrix}$ . Then with respect to the new basis $\alpha$ , the linear operator $\left(\phi\right)_{A}$ is represented by the diagonal matrix $D=\begin{pmatrix} 4 & 0 \\ 0 & -2 \end{pmatrix}$ . That is, we have $P^{- 1}AP=D$ .

[[prev](MA10210se19.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se19.html#tailMA10210se19.html)] [[front](MA10210se20.html)] [[up](MA10210ch4.html#MA10210se20.html)]