[[next](MA10210se19.html)] [[prev](MA10210se17.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se17.html#tailMA10210se17.html)] [[tail](#tailMA10210se18.html)] [[up](MA10210ch4.html#MA10210se18.html)]

### 4.3 [Characterisation of $ \det $](MA10210.html#QQ2-24-37)

Theorem 1.  
Let $D:M_{n , n}\left( \F \right)\rightarrow\F$ be a function that is multilinear and alternating in columns. Then

$$
D \left( A \right) = D \left( I \right)  \det  A .
$$

Proof. Let

$$
c_{j} = \left(col\right)_{j} \left( A \right) = \sum_{k = 1}^{n} a_{k j} e_{k}
$$

where $e_{k}=\left(col\right)_{k}\left( I \right)$ are the standard basis vectors.

As $D$ is multilinear

$$
\begin{align}
D\left( A \right) & = & D\left( c_{1} , \dots  , c_{n} \right) & \text{} \\ & = & \sum_{k_{1} = 1}^{n}a_{k_{1} 1}D\left( e_{k_{1}} , c_{2} , \dots  , c_{n} \right) & \text{} \\ & & \vdots & \text{} \\ & = & \underset{k \in \left(\left\{ 1 , \dots  , n \right\}\right)^{n}}{\sum}a_{k_{1} 1}\dots a_{k_{n} n}D\left( e_{k_{1}} , \dots  , e_{k_{n}} \right). & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

As $D$ is alternating,

$$
D \left( e_{k_{1}} , \dots  , e_{k_{n}} \right) = 0
$$

unless $k_{i}\neq k_{j}$ for $i\neq j$ , i.e. $k_{1},\dots ,k_{n}$ is a permutation of $1,\dots ,n$ .

Thus

$$
\begin{align}
D\left( A \right) & = & \underset{\sigma \in S_{n}}{\sum}a_{\sigma \left( 1 \right) 1}\dots a_{\sigma \left( n \right) n}D\left( e_{\sigma \left( 1 \right)} , \dots  , e_{\sigma \left( n \right)} \right) & \text{} \\ & = & \underset{\sigma \in S_{n}}{\sum}a_{\sigma \left( 1 \right) 1}\dots a_{\sigma \left( n \right) n}sgn\sigmaD\left( e_{1} , \dots  , e_{n} \right)\text{by alt.} & \text{} \\ & = & \left(  \det  A \right)D\left( I \right) & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

as required. □

Corollary 2.  
If $D$ is multilinear, alternating and $D\left( I \right)=1$ , then

$$
D \left( A \right) =  \det  A .
$$

Theorem 3 (Product formula).  
If $A,B\in M_{n , n}\left( \F \right)$ , then

$$
 \det  \left( A B \right) =  \det  A \cdot  \det  B .
$$

Proof. Fix $A$ and consider the function

$$
D \left( B \right) =  \det  \left( A B \right) .
$$

Then

$$
\left(col\right)_{k} \left( A B \right) = A \left(col\right)_{k} \left( B \right)
$$

is a linear function of $b_{k}:=\left(col\right)_{k}\left( B \right)$ .

Hence

$$
D \left( b_{1} , \dots  , b_{n} \right) =  \det  \left( A b_{1} , \dots  , A b_{n} \right)
$$

is a multilinear and alternating function of the $b_{j}$ . By Theorem [4.3.1](#x24-37001r1),

$$
D \left( B \right) = D \left( I \right)  \det  \left( B \right) ,
$$

and by definition,

$$
D \left( I \right) =  \det  \left( A I \right) =  \det  \left( A \right) .
$$

So $ \det \left( A B \right)= \det \left( A \right) \det \left( B \right).$ □

Corollary 4.  

*   If $P$ is invertible matrix, then $ \det P^{- 1}=\frac{1}{ \det  P}$ .
*   Similar matrices have equal determinant.

Proof. (a) If $P$ is invertible then by product formula, $ \det P \det P^{- 1}= \det I=1$ . So

$$
 \det  \left( P^{- 1} \right) = \left(\left(  \det  P \right)\right)^{- 1}
$$

b. Suppose that $A$ and $B$ are similar. Then there is an invertible matrix $P$ such that $B=P^{- 1}AP$ . So

$$
 \det  B =  \det  \left( P^{- 1} A P \right) =  \det  \left( P^{- 1} \right)  \det  A  \det  P =  \det  A .
$$

□

Definition 5.  
Let $\phi:V\rightarrow V$ be a linear operator on a finite-dimensional vector space $V$ . Then

$$
 \det  \phi =  \det  A
$$

where $A$ is a matrix that represents $\phi$ with respect to some basis of $V$ .

Remark 6.  
The determinant $ \det \phi$ is well-defined, because matrices representing the same linear operator are similar (see Corollary [2.6.4](MA10210se11.html#x15-26003r4)) and similar matrices have the same determinant.

Example 7.  
Since we may consider EROs as given by $A\rightarrow tailPA$ , and ECOs as $A\rightarrow tailAP$ , for elementary matrices $P$ , we can view the change of $ \det $ under EROs as example of the product formula

$$
 \det  \left( P A \right) =  \det  P \cdot  \det  A
$$

because $ \det P$ is as computed below.

I.

$$
\begin{align}
 \det  \begin{pmatrix} 1 & & & \\ & \lambda & & \\ & & \ddots & \\ & & & 1 \end{pmatrix} = \lambda .
\end{align}
$$

Note this is a diagonal matrix with one diagonal entry equal to $\lambda$ and the other diagonal entries equal to $1$ .

(II)

$$
\begin{align}
 \det  \begin{pmatrix} \ddots & & & & \\ & 1 & \dots  & \lambda & \\ & & \ddots & \vdots & \\ & & & 1 & \\ & & & & \ddots \end{pmatrix} = 1 , \text{triangular matrix with 1s on the diagonal}
\end{align}
$$

(III)

$$
\begin{align}
 \det  \begin{pmatrix} \ddots & & & \\ & 0 & \dots  & 1 & \\ & \vdots & & \vdots & \\ & 1 & \dots  & 0 & \\ & & & & \ddots \end{pmatrix} = - 1 ,
\end{align}
$$

where the other diagonal entries are $1$ and the only nonzero off-diagonal entries are 1 at $\left( i , j \right)$ and $\left( j , i \right)$ .

(III’)

More generally, if $P\left( \sigma \right)$ is a ‘permutation matrix’, i.e. 

$$
\begin{align}
P \left(\left( \sigma \right)\right)_{i j} = \left\{\begin{matrix} 1 & i=\sigma\left( j \right) \\ 0 & i\neq\sigma\left( j \right) \end{matrix}\right
\end{align}
$$

for some $\sigma\in S_{n}$ , then (see Q7.7)

$$
 \det  P \left( \sigma \right) = sgn \sigma .
$$

[[next](MA10210se19.html)] [[prev](MA10210se17.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se17.html#tailMA10210se17.html)] [[front](MA10210se18.html)] [[up](MA10210ch4.html#MA10210se18.html)]