# Energy in the [[Wave Equation]]

At any moment in time there are two contributions to the energy of the system:

- The kinetic energy.
- The potential energy due to the displacement of the medium.

Taking the physicist's approach, considering a small length of string $\delta x$ the kinetic energy will be given by,

$$
K = \frac 12 (\rho \delta x) u_t^2
$$

and the elastic potential, given by the work done in stretching the string to a length $\delta s$ starting from its original length $\delta x$, where $s$ is the arc length, $(\delta s)^2 \approx (\delta x)^2 + (\delta u)^2$ (since $u \equiv y$ is the vertical displacement). Therefore in the principle of $W = F \dp d$,

$$
\begin{align}
V
&= T \dp (\delta s - \delta x) \\
&\approx T \(
	\sqrt{1 + (u_x)^2} - 1
\)\delta x \\
&\approx T\(1 + \frac {1}{2}(u_x)^2 - 1\)\delta x \\
&= \frac12 T u_x^2 \delta x
\end{align}
$$

Hence the total energy in the system can be obtained by integrating over the length of the string:

$$
E = \frac 12 \int_0^L \rho u_t^2 + T u_x^2 \rd x
$$

Noting that we defined the wavespeed $c = \sqrt{\frac T\rho }$ we can write the total energy as


$$
E = \frac 12 \rho \int_0^L u_t^2 + c^2 u_x^2 \rd x
$$

^eq-16-22

and we will for convenience set $\rho =1$ from now onwards.

## Change over Time

As it stands, the energy $E$ is defined as an integral over space of functions that depend also on time. So how does $E$ vary in time? A nice way to investigate this is to compute the time derivative of the total energy:

$$
\frac{\d E}{\d t} =
\int_0^L
	\frac{\p^2 u}{\p t^2} \frac{\p u}{\p t} +
	c^2 \frac{\p^2 u}{\p t \p x} \frac{\p u}{\p x}
\rd x
$$

differentiating under the integral sign, since the endpoints of the integral do not depend on $t$ (and we assume that everything converges). We then apply an integration by parts to the second term to obtain (check!)

$$ \dd Et = \int_0^L \left[
	\fr{\p^2 u}{\p t^2} \pp{u}{t} -
	c^2 \fr{\p^2 u}{\p x^2} \pp{u}{t}
\right] \rd x + \left[
	\pp{u}{t} \pp{u}{x} \right]_{x=0}^{x=L} $$

and we observe that the final (boundary) term vanishes for any boundary condition that is time-independent (which would imply $\pp{u}{t} = 0$ at $x = 0, L$) as in all the boundary conditions we have considered in this course. Then

$$
\dd Et = \int_0^L \pp{u}{t} \left[
	\frac{\p^2 u}{\p t^2} -
	c^2 \frac{\p^2 u}{\p x^2}
\right] \rd x = 0
$$

since $u$ is a solution to the wave equation. So we have shown that the total energy is in fact constant in time. Energy is conserved by the motion - converted between kinetic and elastic forms but neither created nor destroyed over time.

## Total Energy

Further, it is instructive to relate the total energy to the Fourier coefficients (indeed, there is a very close relationship, and much more is true then we have time to discuss in this course).

Recall the solution [[16.2 Solving the Wave Equation#Summary]] and use it to compute the total energy. First we compute

$$ \pdiff {u}{t} = \sum _{n=1}^\infty \sin \left (\frac {n \pi x}{L} \right ) \left [ -A_n \frac {n\pi c}{L} \sin \left ( \frac {n \pi ct}{L}\right ) +B_n \frac {n\pi c}{L} \cos \left ( \frac {n \pi ct}{L}\right ) \right ] $$

and

$$ \pdiff {u}{x} = \sum _{n=1}^\infty \frac {n \pi }{L} \cos \left (\frac {n \pi x}{L} \right ) \left [ A_n \cos \left ( \frac {n \pi ct}{L}\right ) + B_n \sin \left ( \frac {n \pi ct}{L}\right ) \right ] \, . $$

When we now square each of these expressions and integrate $\int _0^L \cdots \rd x$ we find


$$ \begin{eqnarray}
E & = & \frac {1}{2} \int _0^L \left ( \sum _{n=1}^\infty \sin \left (\frac {n \pi x}{L} \right ) \left [ -A_n \frac {n\pi c}{L} \sin \left ( \frac {n \pi ct}{L}\right ) +B_n \frac {n\pi c}{L} \cos \left ( \frac {n \pi ct}{L}\right ) \right ] \right )^2 \\ 
& & + \, c^2 \left ( \sum _{n=1}^\infty \frac {n \pi }{L} \cos \left (\frac {n \pi x}{L} \right ) \left [ A_n \cos \left ( \frac {n \pi ct}{L}\right ) + B_n \sin \left ( \frac {n \pi ct}{L}\right ) \right ] \right )^2 \, \rd x \end{eqnarray} $$

^eq-16-23


which is a (large) set of terms each of which contains a product of two sines or two cosines in $x$ (the functions of $t$ we consider just as constants for the time being). Explicitly we will have either $\sin (n \pi x/L) \, \sin (m \pi x/L)$ or $\cos (n \pi x/L) \, \cos (m \pi x/L)$. From the [[11.7 Orthogonality Lemma|Orthogonality Lemma]] and our previous work we see that these terms will vanish after integration as long as $n \neq m$. When $n=m$ the integral does not vanish and is equal to $L/2$. Carrying out the $x$ integral we therefore obtain


$$ \begin{eqnarray} E & = & \frac {1}{2} \sum _{n=1}^\infty \left ( \frac {n\pi c}{L} \right )^2 \frac {L}{2} \left [ -A_n \sin \left (\frac {n\pi ct}{L}\right ) + B_n \cos \left ( \frac {n\pi ct}{L}\right ) \right ]^2 \nonumber \\ & & + \left ( \frac {n\pi c}{L} \right )^2 \frac {L}{2} \left [ A_n \cos \left (\frac {n\pi ct}{L}\right ) + B_n \sin \left ( \frac {n\pi ct}{L}\right ) \right ]^2 \, . \nonumber \end{eqnarray} $$

^eq-16-23


Although this expression looks rather complex, it is much simpler than the one before since the summation is outside the squaring $( \cdots )^2$ rather than inside it. For each $n$ the $A_n^2$ terms have coefficients that sum to $1$, as do the $B_n^2$ terms, and the $A_n B_n$ terms cancel. So the expression simplifies further to give

$$ E = \sum _{n=1}^\infty \frac {n^2 \pi ^2 c^2}{4L} \left ( A_n^2 + B_n^2 \right ) \, . $$

which reveals a further property: the total energy can also be thought of as a sum of energies within each separate Fourier mode; the idea of the amount of energy within just one Fourier mode makes sense and is proportional to the sum of the squares of the Fourier coefficients. On a problem sheet we will apply this to the ‘plucked string’ example 16.4.