#### 12.1 Fourier convergence

Summarising the square wave example, we observe (at least numerically) that the Fourier series seems to converge in a pointwise manner to the original function, except at points where $f(x)$ has a discontinuity, $x = n\pi$. Indeed, at such points, the Fourier series takes the value zero as can be seen directly setting $x=0$ in the series on the right hand side of [[12•1#^eq-12-11]]. This is slightly surprising given that we did not define $f(x)$ to take the value zero anywhere. We explore this further, introducing the idea of a one-sided limit.

###### Definition 12.2

(One-sided limits).  Suppose that $x$ approaches the point $c$ from the right. For the limiting value of $f(x)$ we write

$$ f(c_+) := \lim _{\substack {h\to 0 \\ h > 0}} f(c + h), $$

if it exists; this the right hand limit of $f$ at $c$. Similarly, the left hand limit of $f(x)$ at $c$ is defined to be

$$ f(c_-) = \lim _{\substack {h\to 0 \\ h > 0}} f(c - h), $$

if it exists.

###### Example 12.3

.  For the square wave of example 12.1, $f(0_-) = -1$ and $f(0_+) = 1$.

**Remark:** Functions need not always have left hand and right hand limits. For instance, $\sin (1/x)$, as $x\to 0$, has neither.

###### Definition 12.4

(Piecewise continuous).  The function $f(x)$ is piecewise continuous on $(a,b)$ if we can divide $(a,b)$ into a finite number of subintervals where: (i) $f(x)$ is defined and continuous on each; and (ii) the left hand and right hand limits at the endpoints of each subinterval exist.

###### Theorem 12.5

(Fourier convergence theorem).  Let $f$ be a $2\pi$-periodic function, with $f(x)$ and $f’(x)$ piecewise continuous on $(-\pi , \pi )$. Then the Fourier series of $f$ at $x$ converges to the average of the left hand and right hand limits. That is,


$$ \frac {1}{2}\big [f(x_-) + f(x_+)\big ] = \frac {a_0}{2} + \sum _{n=1}^\infty [a_n\cos (nx) + b_n\sin (nx)]. $$
^eq-12-12


###### Example 12.6

.  In the square-wave function [[12•1#^eq-12-1]] with Fourier series [[12•1#^eq-12-11]], we have by Theorem 12.5 that at any point, $x$,


$$ \frac {1}{2}[f(x_-) + f(x_+)] = \frac {4}{\pi } \sum _{m=0}^\infty \frac {\sin [(2m+1)x]}{(2m+1)}. $$
^eq-12-13


which agrees with the left hand limit at $x=0$ being $-1$ and the right hand limit at $x=0$ being $+1$, for example, so that both sides are zero.

Values of $x$ also lead to power series expansions for constants such as $\pi$. For example, evaluating the Fourier series at $x = \pi /2$ we have


$$ 1 = \frac {4}{\pi } \sum _{m=0}^\infty \frac {\sin [(2m+1)\frac {\pi }{2}]}{(2m+1)} = \frac {4}{\pi } \sum _{m=0}^\infty \frac {(-1)^m}{(2m+1)}, $$
^eq-12-14


and so we conclude that


$$ \sum _{m=0}^\infty \frac {(-1)^m}{(2m+1)} = \frac {\pi }{4} \, . $$
^eq-12-15
