# Fourier Coefficients for General Periodic Function

Let $f$ be a [[11.1 Periodic Function|Periodic Function]] with period $2L$. Then the [[Fourier Series]] of $f$ is given by:

$$
f(x) = \frac {a_{0}}{2} + \sum _{n=1}^{\infty }\left [ a_n\, \cos \left (\frac {n\pi x}{L}\right ) + b_n \, \sin \left (\frac {n\pi x}{L}\right )\right ], $$

^eq-12-170

where the _Fourier coefficients_ of $f$ are given by


$$ \begin{align} a_n &= \frac {1}{L}\ \int _{-L}^{L} f(x) \cos \left (\frac {n\pi x}{L}\right )\, \mathrm {d}x, \\ b_n &=\frac {1}{L}\ \int _{-L}^{L} f(x) \sin \left (\frac {n\pi x}{L}\right )\, \mathrm {d}x. \end{align} $$

^eq-12-171

## Proof

We could prove this by re-working the original derivation of the formulas for $a_n$ and $b_n$ from [[11.8 Fourier Coefficients]] directly in this generalised case (try this!), but here we choose to rescale the $x$ coordinate so that the function $f(x)$ becomes $2\pi$ periodic in the new rescaled coordinate. We can then apply the previously mentioned result. To do this we define the new parameter

$$
X = \frac {\pi }{L}x,
$$

and define a new function $g$ to be

$$
g(X) = f(x(X)) = f\(\frac{LX}{\pi}\).
$$

It can be verified firstly that $g(X)$ is $2\pi$ periodic (in $X$) since

$$
\begin{align}
g(X + 2\pi)
&= f\(\frac {L(X + 2\pi)}{\pi}\)  \\
&= f\(\frac{LX}{\pi}\)  \\
&= f\(\frac{LX}{\pi}\)  \\
&= g(X). 
\end{align}
$$

Hence we can write $g(X)$ as a Fourier series:

$$
g(X) = \frac {a_{0}}{2} + \sum _{n=1}^{\infty }\left [ a_n\, \cos (nX) + b_n \, \sin (nX)\right ],
$$

where:

$$
a_n = \frac {1}{\pi }\ \int _{-\pi }^{\pi } g(X) \cos (nX) \, \mathrm {d}X,
$$

and

$$
b_n = \frac {1}{\pi }\ \int _{-\pi }^{\pi } g(X) \sin (nX) \, \mathrm {d}X.
$$

%%^eq-12-17%%

Now take the above formulas and substitute $X = \pi x/L$ (and $\rd X = (\pi /L) \rd x$) and simplify.

## Remark

In Theorem 12.7, we assumed that the Fourier series of the $2L$-periodic function is integrated over the range $[-L, L]$ but it is equivalent to integrate over the range $[0,2L]$ especially if the function is originally defined on $[0, 2L]$ and then periodically extended to $\R$. In this case we can equivalently write

$$ \begin{align*} a_n &= \frac {1}{L}\ \int _{0}^{2L} f(x) \cos \left (\frac {n\pi x}{L}\right )\, \mathrm {d}x \, , \\ b_n &=\frac {1}{L}\ \int _{0}^{2L} f(x) \sin \left (\frac {n\pi x}{L}\right )\, \mathrm {d}x. \end{align*} $$

^eq-12-17

which are equivalent to [[12•2#^eq-12-17]] on account of the periodicity.
 
 ## 12.3 Periodic extensions

Theorem 12.7 shows how the Fourier series of any $2L$-periodic function can be derived. In some applications, we wish to consider a function $f$ defined only on half the the domain, i.e. $[0, L]$ and construct a Fourier series with only cosine terms or sine terms. This can done by extending $f$ in two stages. In the first stage we define a new function on $[-L,0]$ that makes $f$ even or odd on $[-L,L]$. Then we make a periodic extension of this new $f$ as previously. If we extend $f$ by making it into an even function on $[-L,L]$ then its Fourier series involves only cosine terms. If we make $f$ into an odd function on $[-L,L]$ then its Fourier series involves only sine terms. These are called the _even periodic extension_ and _odd periodic extension_, respectively.