### Chapter 12 Fourier series II

In the previous chapter we assumed that a $2\pi$-periodic function could represented in the form of a Fourier series, and we wrote


$$
f(x) = \frac{a_0}{2} + \sum_{n \in \N} (a_{n} \cos (nx) + b_{n} \sin (nx) ). $$

^eq-12-0

We subsequently derived formulas for the coefficients $a_n$ and $b_n$. This dealt with the first question 1 from the start of Chapter 11. The second question asks under what conditions we can establish the convergence of the infinite series on the right to the function $f(x)$ . In other words, when is [[12 Fourier series II#^eq-12-1]] really an equality?

Recall that the convergence of an infinite series depends on the convergence of its sequence of partial sums, which for this case, for a fixed $x$, are given by


$$ S_N(x) = \frac {a_{0}}{2} + \sum _{n=1}^{N}\left (a_{n}\cos (nx) + b_{n} \sin (nx) \right ). $$
^eq-12-1


Thus the Fourier series converges at a point $x$ if and only if its partial sums have a limit:


$$  \lim _{N\to \infty } S_N(x) = \tilde {f}(x). $$
^eq-12-2


Proceeding carefully, we observe that this may or may not equal the value $f(x)$ of the original function. Sorting all this out is the subject of this chapter.

To begin with we present a classic example to demonstrate that convergence is perhaps not as straightforward as you might hope.

###### Example 12.1

(A square wave).  Find the Fourier series of the following function:

$$ f(x) = \begin {cases} -1 & -\pi \leq x < 0, \\ \phantom {-}1 & 0 \leq x < \pi , \end {cases} $$

and

$$ f\left (x+2\pi \right ) = f\left (x\right ). $$

**Solution:** Using definition 12.7 with $L=\pi$ we have

$$ a_0 = \frac {1}{\pi } \int _{-\pi }^{\pi } f(x) \, \mathrm {d}x = 0, $$

and


$$ \begin{align} a_n & = \frac {1}{\pi } \int _{-\pi }^{\pi } f(x) \cos (nx) \, \mathrm {d}x \\ &= \frac {1}{\pi } \int _{-\pi }^{0}(-1) \cos (nx) \, \mathrm {d}x +\frac {1}{\pi } \int _{0}^{\pi }(1) \cos (nx) \, \mathrm {d}x \\ &= -\frac {1}{\pi n} \big [\sin \left (nx\right )\big ]_{-\pi }^{0}+\frac {1}{\pi n}\ \big [\sin \left (nx\right )\big ]_{0}^{\pi } = 0. \end{align} $$
^eq-12-3
 Also,


$$ \begin{align*} b_n & = \frac {1}{\pi } \int _{-\pi }^{\pi } f(x) \sin (nx) \, \mathrm {d}x \\ & = \frac {1}{\pi } \int _{-\pi }^{0} (-1) \sin \left (nx\right )\, \mathrm {d}x + \frac {1}{\pi } \int _{0}^{\pi } (1) \sin \left (nx\right )\, \mathrm {d}x \\ & = \frac {1}{\pi n}\ \big [\cos \left (nx\right )\big ]_{-\pi }^{0} -\frac {1}{\pi n}\ \big [\cos \left (nx\right )\big ]_{0}^{\pi }. \end{align*} $$
^eq-12-6
 Remembering that $\cos n\pi = (-1)^n$, we see that


$$  \begin{aligned} b_n & = \frac {1}{\pi n}\Big ( 1 - (-1)^n\Big ) - \frac {1}{\pi n}\Big ((-1)^n - 1\Big ),\\ & = \frac {2}{\pi n}\Big ( 1 - (-1)^n\Big ), \end {aligned} $$
^eq-12-6


Hence


$$ $$ \begin{aligned} b_n & = {\renewcommand {\baselinestretch }{1.5}\normalsize $$ \begin{cases} \dfrac {4}{n\pi } & n\textrm { }\text {odd},\\ 0 & n\textrm { }\text {even}. \end {cases}} \end {aligned} $$
^eq-12-7


So we have computed a Fourier series representation


$$ f(x) = \lim _{N\to \infty } S_N(x) = \lim _{N\to \infty } \left [ \frac {4}{\pi }\sum _{n=1, \, \text {$n$ odd}}^N \frac {\sin \left (nx\right )}{n}\right ]. $$
^eq-12-8


**Remark:** For Fourier series where half the coefficients vanish and the nonzero coefficients have either even or odd indices, it is common to rewrite the summation so that the index over which we sum increases in unit steps. Thus from [[12 Fourier series II#^eq-12-7]], we set $n = 2m + 1$ for $m = 0, 1, 2, \ldots$, so that


$$ b_{2m} = \frac {4}{(2m+1)\pi }. $$
^eq-12-9


The Fourier series can now be written as


$$  f(x) = \lim _{N\to \infty } S_N = \frac {4}{\pi } \sum _{m=0}^\infty \frac {\sin ([2m+1]x)}{2m+1}. $$
^eq-12-10


##### 12.0.1 Gibbs’ phenomenon [Non-examinable]

We now examine, pictorially, the effect of adding terms one by one to the infinite series; the first approximations to the square wave $f(x)$ are

$$ S_1(x) = \frac {4}{\pi }\sin x, \quad S_3(x) = \frac {4}{\pi }\left ( \sin x + \frac {1}{3} \sin 3x\right ). $$

Figure 12.1 shows $S_N$ with $N=1,3,5,7,9$ and $99$, all plotted on the same axes. We see that the function appears to converge for almost all $x$ but that oscillations remain at multiples of $\pi$ (i.e. where the function is discontinuous); the wavelength of these oscillations decreases as $N\rightarrow \infty$, but the amplitude appears to stay constant. The presence of these oscillations is called the _Gibbs’ phenomenon_.

Figure 12.1: Figure showing the square wave, $S_N$ with $N=1,3,5,7,9$ and $99$, all plotted on the same axes.

The error between the partial sums $S_N(x)$ and the original function $f(x)$ behaves differently depending on how we measure it. From the fact that for almost every $x$ the sequence of partial sums $S_N(x)$ approaches $f(x)$ we can prove that

$$ \lim _{N \rightarrow \infty } \int _{-\pi }^\pi |S_N(x) - f(x)|^2 \ \rd x = 0 . $$

However, if we look at the maximum value of the error over all values of $x$, i.e.


$$ \max _{x\in (-\pi ,\pi ]} |S_N(x)-f(x)|, $$
^eq-12-11


(sometimes called $\|S_N(x-f\|_\infty$ we observe that due to Gibbs’ phenomenon this does not tend to zero as $N\rightarrow \infty$ but remains around $9\%$.

More precisely, for any $N$ we can find a point $x_N$ corresponding to the highest peak of the oscillations near the point $0$, or equivalently $2\pi$ (i.e. where $f$ jumps up). We can show that the _height_ of the peak does not tend to zero as $N\rightarrow \infty$, although it does move closer to the location of the discontinuity. This shows that, as a function, $S_N$ does not converge uniformly to $f$. However, pointwise it is true that for every point $x$ away from the discontinuities, $S_N(x) \rightarrow f(x)$ as $N \rightarrow \infty$. This is explored further on problem sheet 7.