[[next](MA10210se3.html)] [[prev](MA10210se1.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se1.html#tailMA10210se1.html)] [[tail](#tailMA10210se2.html)] [[up](MA10210ch1.html#MA10210se2.html)]

### 1.2 [Solving linear systems: Gaussian elimination](MA10210.html#QQ2-5-4)

A general system of $m$ linear equations in $n$ unknowns  

$$
\begin{align}
a_{1 1}x_{1}+\dots +a_{1 n}x_{n} & = & b_{1} & \text{} \\ \vdots & & \vdots & \text{} \\ a_{m 1}x_{1}+\dots +a_{m n}x_{n} & = & b_{m} & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

written in matrix form, i.e. $Ax=b$ , or

$$
\begin{align}
\begin{pmatrix} a_{1 1} & \dots  & a_{1 n} \\ \vdots & & \vdots \\ a_{m 1} & \dots  & a_{m n} \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix} x_{1} \\ \vdots \\ x_{n} \end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} b_{1} \\ \vdots \\ b_{m} \end{pmatrix}
\end{align}
$$

is solved by reducing $A$ to row echelon form (REF) to give an equivalent system which is easy to solve. The method is called Gaussian elimination.

Definition 1.  
A matrix $A$ is in row echelon form (REF) if

(i)

all zero rows are at the bottom,

(ii)

first non-zero entry in each non-zero row is $1$ ; these are called pivots,

(iii)

the pivot in row $i+1$ is strictly right of the pivot in row $i$ .

  
$A$ is in reduced row echelon form (RREF) if also

(iv)

all entries above each pivot are zero.

Example 2.  

$$
\begin{align}
 & \text{REF} & \begin{pmatrix} \begin{matrix}1 & 2 & 5 & 3 & 4 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 2 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\end{matrix} \end{pmatrix}\text{pivots are in bold} & \text{} \\ & \text{RREF} & \begin{pmatrix} \begin{matrix}1 & 2 & 0 & 0 & 4 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\end{matrix} \end{pmatrix} & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

Note.  
[(ii)](#x5-40042) and [(iii)](#x5-40053) imply that all entries below any pivot are zero.

#### [Gaussian elimination algorithm](MA10210ch1.html#QQ2-5-5)

Theorem 3.  
Any matrix $A$ can be converted to REF or RREF by a sequence of elementary row operations (ERO’s) of three types:

(I)

$R_{i}\rightarrow\lambda R_{i}$ ( $\lambda\neq 0$ ): multiply row $i$ by non-zero scalar,

(II)

$R_{i}\rightarrow R_{i}+\lambda R_{j}$ : add any multiple of row $j$ to row $i$ ,

(III)

$R_{i}\leftrightarrowR_{j}$ : swap row $i$ and $j$ .

Proof. Convert $A$ into REF:

1.

Find the first non-zero entry in the first non-zero column and move it to the top row (III);

2.

Divide the row to obtain a pivot $=1$ (I);

3.

Make all other entries below the pivot zero by (II);

4.

Repeat on smaller matrix with first row omitted.

5.

Repeat 1-4 again if it is necessary, unitl a REF is obtained.

Convert an REF to an RREF:

6.

Use (II) to make entries above each pivot zero. □

Example 4.  

$$
\begin{align}
\begin{pmatrix} 2 & 2 & 4 & 3 \\ 1 & 1 & 2 & 0 \\ 2 & 5 & 4 & 4 \\ 1 & 2 & 2 & 2 \end{pmatrix}
\end{align}
$$

reduces to REF matrix

$$
\begin{align}
\begin{pmatrix} 1 & 1 & 2 & \frac{3}{2} \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & \frac{1}{3} \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix}
\end{align}
$$

Variations:

*   In [1](#x5-50051) choose any (not first) non-zero entry;
*   Omit [2](#x5-50062) to have merely non-zero pivots (not $=1$ ).

Note.  
Need coefficients in a field for [2](#x5-50062) (or [3](#x5-50073), when [2](#x5-50062) omitted) to work.

Example 5.  
For

$$
\begin{align}
A = \begin{pmatrix} 1 & 3 & 1 \\ 2 & 4 & 4 \\ -1 & 2 & s \end{pmatrix} , b = \begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 1 \\ t \end{pmatrix}
\end{align}
$$

find values of $s,t\inℝ$ for which the equation $Ax=b$ has:

(a)

unique solution;

(b)

no solution;

(c)

infinitely many solutions.

Solution. 

Solve by row reducing the augmented matrix $\left( A \left| b \right)$

$$
\begin{align}
 & & \begin{pmatrix} \begin{matrix}1 & 3 & 1 \\ 2 & 4 & 4 \\ -1 & 2 & s\end{matrix} \left|\begin{matrix} \begin{matrix}2 \\ 1 \\ t\end{matrix} \end{matrix}\right \end{pmatrix} & \text{} \\ & R_{2}-2R_{1},R_{3}+R_{1}\rightarrow & \begin{pmatrix} \begin{matrix}1 & 3 & 1 \\ 0 & -2 & 2 \\ 0 & 5 & 1+s\end{matrix} \left|\begin{matrix} \begin{matrix}2 \\ -3 \\ 2+t\end{matrix} \end{matrix}\right \end{pmatrix} & \text{} \\ & R_{3}+\frac{5}{2}R_{2},-\frac{1}{2}R_{2}\rightarrow & \begin{pmatrix} \begin{matrix}1 & 3 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & -1 \\ 0 & 0 & 6+s\end{matrix} \left|\begin{matrix} \begin{matrix}2 \\ \frac{3}{2} \\ t-\frac{1 1}{2}\end{matrix} \end{matrix}\right \end{pmatrix} & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

(a)

Solution is unique if $s\neq-6$ , so $\exists$ 3 pivots and so can solve uniquely for all 3 variables.

(b)

No solution if $s=-6$ but $t\neq\frac{1 1}{2}$ , for then $\left(row\right)_{3}=0$ while $b_{3}\neq 0$ , making the system inconsistent.

(c)

If $s=-1$ , $t=\frac{1 1}{2}$ , then have consistent system with 2 pivots, so for general solution set $x_{3}=\lambda$ , 
$$
\begin{align}
\Rightarrow & & x_{2}=\frac{3}{2}+\lambda & \text{} \\ & & x_{1}=2-3x_{2}-x_{3}=-\frac{5}{2}-4\lambda, & \text{}
\end{align}
$$

i.e.

$$
\left( x_{1} , x_{2} , x_{3} \right) = \left(2 , \frac{3}{2} , 0\right) + \lambda \left(- 4 , 1 , 1\right)
$$

for any $\lambda\inℝ$ .

#### [Key observations](MA10210ch1.html#QQ2-5-6)

In general, if $A$ is in REF, then

(i)

can solve linear system $Ax=b$ provided $b_{j}=0$ whenever $\left(row\right)_{j}\left( A \right)=0$ ;

(ii)

a row $\left( 0 - 0 1 * - * \right)$ with pivot in the $k$ th column expresses the pivot variable $x_{k}$ in terms of variables $x_{m}$ , $m>k$ , explicitly

$$
x_{k} + \underset{j > k}{\sum} a_{i j} x_{j} = b_{i} ,
$$

so we can solve system recursively, setting non-pivot variables (i.e. the variables that are not pivot variables) to take arbitrary values;

(iii)

if $A$ is in RREF, then solution is non-recursive, and expresses each pivot variable directly in terms of non-pivot variables.

Lemma 6 (Fundamental Lemma).  
Let $A$ be an $m\times n$ matrix. If $n>m$ , then there is a non-zero solution to linear system $Ax=0$ . That is, a homogeneous linear system with fewer equations than unknowns has a non-trivial solution.

Proof. When we convert the linear system $A$ to REF, there are at most $m$ pivots. As $m<n$ , there are non-pivot variables. Choosing a nonzero value to a non-pivot variable $x_{j}$ gives a nonzero solution to the linear system. □

[[next](MA10210se3.html)] [[prev](MA10210se1.html)] [[prev-tail](MA10210se1.html#tailMA10210se1.html)] [[front](MA10210se2.html)] [[up](MA10210ch1.html#MA10210se2.html)]