#### 5.3 Transposes

There is a duality construction for linear maps also: let $V,W$ be vector spaces, $\phi \in L(V,W)$ and $\alpha \in W^{*}$. Then $\alpha \circ \phi :V\to \F$ is also linear, so that $\alpha \circ \phi \in V^{*}$. This prompts:

###### Definition

. Let $\phi \in L(V,W)$ be a linear map of vector spaces. The _transpose $\phi ^T$ of $\phi$_ is the map $\phi ^T:W^{*}\to V^{*}$ given by

$\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

$$ \phi ^T(\alpha ):=\alpha \circ \phi , $$

for all $\alpha \in W^{*}$.

- [[Lemma 5.14]]. $\phi ^T:W^{*}\to V^{*}$ is also a linear map.

- Proof. Let $\alpha ,\beta \in W^{*}$ and $\lambda \in \F$. We must show that

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ \phi ^T(\alpha +\lambda \beta )=\phi ^T(\alpha )+\lambda \phi ^T(\beta ). $$

  Unravelling the definition, this means

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ (\alpha +\lambda \beta )\circ \phi =\alpha \circ \phi +\lambda \beta \circ \phi . $$

  This is an equality of functions and so holds exactly when

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ (\alpha +\lambda \beta )(\phi (v))=\alpha (\phi (v))+\lambda (\beta (\phi (v))), $$

  for all $v\in V$. However, this last is true by the very definition of addition and scalar multiplication in $W^{*}$. □

###### Examples

.

Here is why $\phi ^T$ is called the transpose of $\phi$:

- [[Proposition 5.15]]. Let $V,W$ be finite-dimensional vector spaces and $\phi \in L(V,W)$ with matrix $A\in M_{m\times n}(\F )$ with respect to bases $\lst {v}1n$ and $\lst {w}1m$ of $V$ and $W$.

  Then $\phi ^T$ has matrix $A^T$ with respect to the dual bases $\dlst {w}1m$ and $\dlst {v}1n$ of $W^{*}$ and $V^{*}$.

- Proof. Let $\phi ^T$ have matrix $B$ so that

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ \phi ^T(w^{_}*j)=\sum *{i=1}^nB\_{ij}v^{_}\_i. $$

  Evaluate both sides of this at $v_k$ to get

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ \begin{align*} \phi ^T(w^{*}_j)(v_k)&=B_{kj}\\ \end{align\*} $$ or, unravelling the definition of $\phi ^T$,

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ \begin{align*} w^{*}_j(\phi (v_k))&=B_{kj}. \end{align\*} $$ Now

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ \phi (v*k)=\sum *{i=1}^mA\_{ik}w_i $$

  so that we also get

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ w*j^{\*}(\phi (v_k))=A*{jk}. $$

  Comparing these we get $B_{kj}=A_{jk}$ whence $B=A^T$. □

The kernels and images of $\phi$ and $\phi ^T$ are intimately related via the annihilators and solution sets of §5.2:

- [[Theorem 5.16]]. Let $\phi \in L(V,W)$ be a linear map of vector spaces. Then

  - (1)

    $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

    $$ \begin{align*} \ker \phi &=\sol (\im \phi ^T)\\ \im \phi &\leq \sol (\ker \phi ^T) \end{align*} $$ with equality if $V,W$ are finite-dimensional.

  - (2)

    $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

    $$ \begin{align*} \ker \phi ^T&=\ann (\im \phi )\\ \im \phi ^T&\leq \ann (\ker \phi ) \end{align*} $$ with equality if $V,W$ are finite-dimensional.

- Proof. We will prove (1) and leave (2) as an exercise9.

  For the first equality, observe that $v\in \ker \phi$ if and only if $\phi (v)=0$ or, equivalently, by [[Theorem 5.4]], $\alpha (\phi (v))=0$, for all $\alpha \in W^{*}$, which is the same as $\phi ^T(\alpha )(v)=0$, for all $\alpha \in W^{*}$, that is, $v\in \sol (\im \phi ^T)$.

  If $V,W$ are finite-dimensional we now use this, along with rank-nullity and [[Proposition 5.7]], to get

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ \dim V-\dim \im \phi = \dim \ker \phi =\dim \sol (\im \phi ^T)=\dim V-\dim \im \phi ^T $$

  so that

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{2}$

  $$ \label {eq:26} \rank \phi =\dim \im \phi =\dim \im \phi ^T=\rank \phi ^T. $$

  For $\im \phi \leq \sol (\ker \phi ^T)$, let $w\in \im \phi$ and $\alpha \in \ker \phi ^T$ so that $\alpha \circ \phi =0$ and $w=\phi (v)$, for some $v\in V$. Then $\alpha (w)=\alpha (\phi (v))=(\alpha \circ \phi )(v)=0$ so that $w\in \sol (\ker \phi ^T)$. Thus $\im \phi \leq \sol (\ker \phi ^T)$.

  Moreover, if $V,W$ are finite-dimensional, use (5.3), rank-nullity and [[Proposition 5.7]] to get

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{3}$

  $$ \dim \im \phi =\dim \im \phi ^T =\dim W-\dim \ker \phi ^T=\dim \sol (\ker \phi ^T). $$

  We conclude that $\im \phi$ and $\dim \sol (\ker \phi ^{T})$ have the same dimension and so coincide. □

Along the way, we got (5.3):

- [[Corollary 5.17]]. Let $\phi \in L(V,W)$ be a linear map of finite-dimensional vector spaces. Then

  $\seteqnumber{0}{5.}{3}$

  $$ \rank \phi =\rank \phi ^T. $$

- Remark. This gives us a new take on an old result from Algebra 1B (Chapter 3, Proposition 6). Let $A\in M_{m\times n}(\F )$ be the matrix of $\phi$ with respect to bases of $V$ and $W$ so that, by [[Proposition 5.15]], $A^T$ is the matrix of $\phi ^T$ with respect to the dual bases. Then the rank of $\phi$ is the column rank of $A$ while the rank of $\phi ^T$ is the column rank of $A^T$ which is the row rank of $A$. Thus row rank and column rank coincide.

The punchline of [[Theorem 5.16]] is that $\phi$ and $\phi ^T$ have “opposite” properties. For example:

- [[Proposition 5.18]]. Let $\phi \in L(V,W)$ be a linear map of finite-dimensional vector spaces. Then

  - (1) $\phi$ injects if and only if $\phi ^T$ surjects.
  - (2) $\phi ^T$ injects if and only if $\phi$ surjects.

- Proof. For (1), $\phi$ injects if and only if $\ker \phi =\set 0$ while $\phi ^T$ surjects if and only if $\dim \im \phi ^T=\dim V$. By [[Theorem 5.16]], the first happens if and only if $\sol (\im \phi ^T)=\set 0$ but, by [[Proposition 5.7]], this is equivalent to the $\dim \im \phi ^T=\dim V$.

  Item (2) is similar. □

- Remarks.
- - 1. This result is useful as it is sometimes easier to prove injectivity than surjectivity.
  - 2. With a bit more effort, we can do better than [[Proposition 5.18]]: for example, using [[Theorem 5.4]], we can prove that [[Proposition 5.18]](2) holds even in infinite dimensions.

9 Question 5 on sheet 9.
